CONSIDERATION of the metaphorical or parabolic method of our Lord is necessary as a preliminary study, for there has been some misinterpretation of our Lord’s reason for His use of such method, There are two self-evident facts : first, that our Lord did use the parabolic method ; and secondly, that at a certain stage in His ministry
He employed it in a new way.

The fourth chapter of Mark’s Gospel opens with the statement that on that day Jesus went out of the house, and went into a boat, and He spoke “ many things in parables.” The thirty-third and thirty fourth verses declare, “ With many such l’arables spake He the word unto them . . . and without a parable spake He not unto them.” This means that He used parables constantly in what He said to the multitudes. In the course of these thirty-four verses there are two sections dealing with the reason of His parabolic method. The first is found in
verses ten to twelve. There He answered a question, and told the disciples the reason of His method. The second section is in verses twenty-one to twenty-five, again an explanation of His method.

In the first paragraph we have not a full explanation from our Lord, and that section demands the second paragraph. In the first explanatory paragraph we are faced with a difficulty, which we will state and
consider, and make certain deductions therefrom.

At this hour in the ministry of Jesus He specially adopted the parabolic method for addressing the crowds. He had used parabolic
illustrations before this time, notably to the woman of Samaria, when He spoke of the water of life ; to the disciples, when He told them
fields were white to harvest ; in Nazareth, when He spoke of the physician and his healing work ; to the disciples again, of fishers of
men ; and in His Manifesto, of salt and light and building. But the Sower was the first full parable, uttered at this time.

Tracing the course of our Lord’s ministry we shall find that there had come a moment when definite and positive hostility had hardened in a peculiar manner. In the home at Capemaum He had been challenged, because He had claimed to forgive sins. In the house of Levi He had been challenged because He permitted His disciples to omit fasting, and because He consorted with sinners. In the cornfields He had been criticized for allowing His disciples to pluck the ears of corn on the Sabbath. In a synagogue on a later Sabbath, He was challenged,
and they counselled to destroy Him. Again, in the house in Capernaum He was charged with being in complicity with the devil. All this had its definite effect upon the minds of the people. In the third chapter we
find it said, “ He looked round about on them with anger, being grieved at the hardening of their heart.” That was the mental condition of the hour, of the rulers, which affected the crowds. This hardening of heart meant callousness, blindness, determination not to listen, nor to obey ; or if to listen, then only critically, and destructively.

At that time Jesus adopted this parabolic method when speaking to the multitudes. When their hardness of heart made Him angry, then
in a very definite and enlarged form He began to use parables ; His anger being the result of His grace, in the presence of their attitude.

The difficulty here is found in the tenth to twelfth verses. Much
has been said about it, and there have been differing interpretations.
The apparent meaning of the passage is that Jesus adopted the method
of the parable to prevent these people understanding, and to be
forgiven. That is the first impression made upon the mind as the verses
are read.