
PART I 

I. The Parabolic Method 
Mark iv: I,
za,
10-12,
21-25,
33,
34
A CONSIDERATION 

of the metaphorical or parabolic method of our 

Lord is necessary as a preliminary study, for there has been some 

misinterpretation of our Lord’s reason for His use of such method, 

There are two self-evident facts :
first, that our Lord did use the 

parabolic method ;
and secondly, that at a certain stage in His ministry 

He employed it in a new way. 

The fourth chapter of Mark’s Gospel opens with the statement that 

on that day Jesus went out of the house, and went into a boat, and 

He spoke “ 
many things in parables.” The thirty-third and thirty-
fourth verses declare, “
With many such l
spake He the word 

unto them ... and without a parable spake He not unto them.” This 

means that He used parables constantly in what He said to the multitudes. In the course of these thirty-four verses there are two sections 
dealing with the reason of His parabolic method. The first is found in 
verses ten to twelve. There He answered a question, and told the 

disciples the reason of His method. The second section is in verses 

twenty-one to twenty-five, again an explanation of His method. 

In the first paragraph we have not a full explanation from our Lord, 
and that section demands the second paragraph. In the first explanatory 
paragraph we are faced with a difficulty, which we will state and 
consider, and make certain deductions therefrom. 

At this hour in the ministry of Jesus He specially adopted the 
parabolic method for addressing the crowds. He had used parabolic 
illustrations before this time, notably to the woman of Samaria,
when 
He spoke of the water of life ;
to the disciples, when He told them 
fields were white to harvest ;
in Nazareth, when He spoke of the 
physician and his healing work ;
to the disciples again, of fishers of 
men ;
and in His Manifesto, of salt and light and building. But the 
Sower was the first full parable, uttered at this time. 

Tracing the course of our Lord’s ministry we shall find that there 
had come a moment when definite and positive hostility had hardened 
in a peculiar manner. In the home at Capemaum He had been challenged, 
because He had claimed to forgive sins. In the house of Levi 
He had been challenged because He permitted His disciples to omit 
fasting, and because He consorted with sinners. In the cornfields He 
had been criticized for allowing His disciples to pluck the ears of corn 
on the Sabbath. In a synagogue on a later Sabbath, He was challenged,

9 

IO PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

and they counselled to destroy Him. Again, in the house in Capernaum

He was charged with being in complicity with the devil. All this had 

its definite effect upon the minds of the people. In the third chapter we

find
it said, “
He looked round about on them with anger, being grieved

at the hardening of their heart.” That was the mental condition of the 

hour, of the rulers, which affected the crowds. This hardening of heart

meant callousness, blindness, determination not to listen, nor to obey;
or if to listen, then only critically, and destructively.

At that time Jesus adopted this parabolic method when speakingto the multitudes. When their hardness of heart made Him angry, thenin a very definite and enlarged form He began to use parables ;
His 
anger being the result of His grace, in the presence of their attitude.

The difficulty here is found in the tenth to twelfth verses. Much 
has been said about it, and there have been differing interpretations.
The apparent meaning of the passage is that Jesus adopted the methodof the parable to prevent these people understanding, and to beforgiven. That is the first impression made upon the mind as the versesare read. 

There have been two methods of dealing with that difficulty. The 
first is that this is a truth which must be accepted though not understood. 
Some Bible teachers and expositors take the view that our Lorddeliberately adopted the parabolic method here that the people shouldnot see, or understand, or be forgiven. The second method of dealingwith this passage is that the statement is not true, that He neversaid it, and therefore the passage is untrustworthy. That secondmethod is impossible of belief by those who hold that the record is true.

But is the difficulty due to what the passage really says, or tolong-
continued interpretation, or misinterpretation of it ?
Was the reason 
of the parabolic method that men should be prevented from understanding, 
and so be excluded from the mercy of God ? That would 
surely be blasphemy, and would contradict the whole purpose of Godin Christ, and of Christ in the world. Consequently we must look atthis a little more particularly.

There is one important fact to bear in mind, that the narrative ofMark is condensed ;
and that of Luke is even more so at this point.
Matthew’s account is much fuller. In the thirteenth chapter of thatGospel, after the parable of the sower, “
The disciples came, and saidunto Him, Why speakest Thou unto them in parables ?
”
And He 
answered, “
Unto you it is given to know the mysteries of the Kingdomof heaven, but to them it is not given. For whosoever hath, to him shallbe given, and he shall have abundance ;
but whosoever hath not, fromhim shall be taken away even that which he hath. Therefore speak Ito them in parables ;
because seeing they see not, and hearing theyhear not, neither do they understand.” Carefully notice the change.
“
Seeing they see not,” not that they may not see. “
Hearing theyhear not, neither do they understand.” They are seeing, but they do 

THE PARABOLIC METHOD ff
not see. They are hearing, but they do not understand. Therefore 

He spoke to them in parables. 

Our Lord then quoted Isaiah, and Matthew writes, ‘
And unto 

them is fulfilled the prophecy of Isaiah, which saith, By hearing ye 

shall hear, and shall in no wise understand ;
and seeing ye shall see, 

and shall in no wise perceive.” Why ?
“ 
For this people’s heart is waxed gross, and their ears are dull of 
hearing and their eyes have they closed ;
lest haply
. . .
Matthew 
and Mark both use the word “ 
lest,” but the word needs a context 
larger than Mark quoted. The ‘
lest ”
is the “
lest ”
of their attitude, 
their hardness, of their persistence in unbelief. He was grieved with 
their hardness of heart, and that was the reason why He adopted the 
parabolic method. They had hardened their hearts until they had 
become gross ;
until they with seeing eyes were nevertheless blind. 
That was their attitude. They had done this lest they should be 
drawn back to God, and halted, and be forgiven. They were not 
aware of that ultimate, but that was their condition. 

Carry the thought a little further. According to Matthew, the 
disciples had enquired the reason for speaking in parables. The Lord’s 
answer was that it was given to them to know the mysteries. He told 
His disciples that the difference in method was due to a difference in 
relationship. To those of His disciples who were obedient, who submitted 
to Him, the mysteries could be made known. To those without, 
those not yielded, and not obedient, those refusing and hardening the 
heart, the parabolic was the necessary method. 

Go on to verses twenty-one to twenty-five in this fourth chapter of 
Mark. He used the lamp as His illustration. This lamp is not put 
under the bushel, which would extinguish it. It is put on a stand. 
The parables therefore constituted a lamp, a lamp shining. It was 
not in order to hide things, but that the hidden things might be brought 
to light. These people could not, because of the attitude they had 
assumed, receive the mysteries, the profound things of the Kingdom of 
God. His disciples could receive those mysteries ;
but to those 
without, the parable was a lamp. There is nothing hidden except 
that it may be manifested. There is nothing secret but that it may 
be revealed. He gave them parabolic pictures, so that they might 
enquire. The purpose of the story, the picture, was to lure them to 
think, in order that they might find their way into the higher mystery. 

Therefore it is important that the passage in Mark should be 
interpreted by the fuller passage in Matthew. Take that matchless 
triptych of stories constituting one great parable, recorded in the 
fifteenth chapter of Luke, the lost sheep, the lost silver, and the lost 
son. That was spoken to men who were blundering, and protesting 
against Him. There is nothing in that story of the mysteries of the 
Kingdom ;
but it is there. Can we suppose Jesus told those men that 
story of lost things sought, and found, in order to prevent their coming 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

to God, and finding mercy ?
If they had heard that story, enquired

concerning it, sought its deep significance, they would have found

themselves in the presence of all the height and depth and length and

breadth of the mystery of the Kingdom of God.

In other words, the parable is ever the open door to the mystery.

If men will consider the picture, and enquire, He will always answer.

The parables therefore do but illustrate the whole fact of His approach

to the human heart. 

There is a remarkable statement in the Proverbs.

 
It is the glory of God to conceal a thing;
But the glory of kings is to search out a matter.” 
That is true in Nature. God conceals behind that which is sacramental 
that which is supreme, so that men may take the thing that is manifest,
and so following and enquiring, may find the deep secret. It is the 
glory of God to conceal a thing, but it is the glory of kings to search 
out a matter. The writer did not mean merely kings on the earthlylevel, but the kingly nature, which is always seeking for the secretthing.
The same philosophy is in the great word of Moses, uttered long 
ago, “
The secret things belong unto the Lord our God ;
but the thingsthat are revealed belong unto us and to our children for ever.” The 
secret things are there that we may discover them. Nature is a greatparable. Think of the earth, and of research, the things man hasbeen finding out. They were all there from the beginning, but werehidden. 
With reverence let it be said that the Lord Himself and the whole 
fact of the Incarnation is a parable. ”
No man hath seen God at anytime, but the only begotten Son Which is in the bosom of the Father,
He hath declared Him.” The secret hidden, mysterious, of the Beingof Godhead. No man has seen that ;
but as the old philosopher talkingto Job, said, 
Canst thou by searching find out God?
Canst thou find out the Almighty unto perfection ?
”
That is perfectly true, but God has revealed Himself, and supremely,
in His Son. The Son therefore becomes the picture, the parable, whichbeing known and investigated, God Himself is found.

Our Lord did not intend then in the use of the parable to preventmen seeing, but to help them to see. He did not want to preventthem hearing, but to quicken their power of hearing. He did not keepmen away from the forgiveness and the mercy of God, but He luredthem towards it. As we come to these wonderful illustrations, andthe more definite parables, we shall see He is not hiding, but veiling

 
The light that were else too bright,
For the feebleness of a sinner’s sight.” 
PARABOLIC ILLUSTRATIONS IN THE MANIFESTO 13
If the truth can be suggested by the story, in the presence of that storymen may presently find
the depth and wonder of the mystery. 

2.
Parabolic Illustrations in the Manifesto 
Matthew v and vi (I) 

T
T
HE FIRST parabolic illustration is found in the fourth chapter ofthis Gospel of Matthew, when Jesus spoke of His disciples as“ 
fishers of men.” This is postponed now, to be returned to at a laterchapter, where again the figure is more particularly used.
The Manifesto is radiant in its wealth of parabolic illustrations.
Salt, light, a city on a hill, lamp, bushel, lampstand, house, Gehenna,
adversary, judge, officer, prison, throne, footstool, feet, inner chamber,
door, moth, rust, thieves, eye, darkness, birds, lilies, oven, mote, beam,
dogs, pearls, swine, loaf, stone, fish, serpent, gate, way, sheep, wolves,
fruits, grapes, thorns, figs, thistles, tree, fire, rock, floods, winds,
sand. There are forty-nine, and these are not all. They are all commonthings, and familiar to everybody.
Here we shail look at those illustrations of definite statement, ratherthan those of incidental reference. These illustrations, moreover, areall within the moral realm, ethical. The Manifesto is the ultimate code 
of laws for the Kingdom of God,. established upon earth. We shall 
endeavour in each case to find the subject our Lord was intending toillustrate when He used the particular parabolic illustration, or parable.
In these first two chapters we shall look frrst
at the parabolicillustration of salt and light ;
secondly, those of moth, rust, andthieves ;
and, thirdly, the illustration of the eye.
Salt and light. What was the subject with which our Lord wasdealing, and which He intended to illustrate ?
The influence that was 
to be exerted by the subjects of His Kingdom. He had begun withthose wonderful beatitudes ;
and then had enunciated certain laws,
and showed that in His Kingdom character was supreme. He hadproceeded to show that the reasons of such character is not so much ofpersonal value, but of the influence such character exerts. Oh, themarvel of these illustrations, their choosing, the brilliance of them,
the finality of them. Whenever He spoke He did so with authority,
the authority not of dogmatism, but of inherent, necessary, andinevitable truth. 

The influence then is twofold, salt and light. There is a distinction 
and a difference, and yet the figures merge into one thought, “
salt of 
the earth,” “
light of the world.”

“
Salt of the earth.” What is the value of salt ?
It is not antiseptic, 
but aseptic. Antiseptic is something which is against poison, 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

and which tends to its cure. Aseptic is something which is devoid of 

poison in itself. Salt never cures corruption. It prevents the spread 

of corruption. If meat is tainted and corrupt, salt will not make it 

untainted and pure. But salt in its neighbourhood will prevent the 

spread of corruption to that which otherwise would become tainted. 

The figure is that of a moral quality operating on the earth level, 

amongst men living in the midst of material things, preventing the 

spread of corruption. The impurity of an evil man cannot be cured 

by a good man, working at his side in an office
;
but the things the 

good man will not do, and the things he will not say will give the 

boy in the same oflice
a chance, because it will check the evil man. 

Salt is aseptic.

The function of the subjects of His Kingdom is to live in the midst 
of humanity in the terrible condition of sin, and by living there according 
to the ethic of the Kingdom of God, to prevent the spread of evil. 
It is the Lord’s work to cure it, thank God. However impure and 
corrupt the heart may be, He can cleanse it, and make it purer than 
the driven snow. The subjects of His Kingdom are so to live that they 
give goodness its opportunity, and hold in check the forces of corruption. 
Our Lord emphasized this with those words of satire, gentle, but 
clear and sharp as the lightning. “
If the salt have lost its savour, 
wherewith shall it be salted ?
”
I like the Scotch rendering of that,
“ 
If the salt has lost its tang.” That is a great word, tang, the pungent 
power of salt. Jesus says His people are to exercise that influence in 
the world. That is our responsibility, though men may not be pleased. 

But again, not only the salt of the earth, referring to a moral quality 
of things :
but, “ 
Ye are the light of the world.” That refers to a 
spiritual revelation which is to radiate from these subjects of the 
Kingdom. We are the light of the cosmos, of all the order, not merely 
of the earth, but of the universe. We remember another occasion 
when the Master said, “ 
I am the Light of the world.” Linking this 
up with that great full word concerning Himself, we understand when 
we are yielded to Him, subjects of His Kingdom, obeying Him, then 
we too become the light of the world. The quality of light is not that 
it desires to be looked at !
Light enables other things to be seen by 
its shining. The sun is in the heaven, not to be looked at, but the 
sunshine enables us to see other things clearly. “
Ye are the light of 
the world.” Let your light so shine that men may glorify your Father. 
The light of the Christian shining in the world illuminates all the worldly 
order, so that men see the true way. 

In this connection two figures are employed by our Lord, “
a city 
set on a hill,” and “
a lamp ... on the stand.” The city set on a hill 
is for the illumination of vast distances. No Christian can fulfil that 
ideal alone. That demands fellowship, a corporate relationship. That 
demands the whole Church. Every church should be a city set on a 
hill, illuminating the far expanses of life. 

PARABOLIC ILLUSTRATIONS IN THE MANIFESTO 15
Then He came from the figure of the city on a hill into a house,
and there took the figure of a lampstand, illuminating the home, and‘the near. Inevitably the mind goes back to a word of the psalmistin the Old Testament,

 
Thy word is a lamp unto my feet,
And light unto my path.” 
Keep the figures separate. The light shines from some eminence,
indicating the road, the pathway. The light shines on the way to betrodden, so that the way may be found along the illuminated pathby the lamp. Thy word, says the psalmist, is a lamp. Each Christian 
man and woman has to fulfil
a double function in the world. The 
whole Church in its corporate relationship, in the bonds of love, friendship, 
and service, is to illuminate the distances ;
and then in the home,
with the shut door, the lamp is to illuminate everything there. Christ 
said here the lamp is not put under a bushel but on a stand. Manyyears ago I heard that prince of expositors, Dr. Maclaren, say thisilluminative thing : “
No man lights a lamp and puts it under a bushel.
If he did, what would happen ? Either the bushel would put out thelight, or the light would set the bushel on fire !
”
We can apply that.
That is exactly what our Lord was teaching here.

He then used three illustrations, moth, rust, and thieves. Thesubject that He was illustrating here was that of the futility ofearthcentred
life. He was showing the folly of living such a life. He showed 
what the attitude of His subjects should be towards necessary things,
and the superlative things. He was talking to them about amassingtreasure, and He used finely sarcastic language about the treasures ofearth “
moth and rust corrupt,” and “
thieves break through andsteal.” These are Eastern figures. At the time the wealth of theEast consisted in fine fabrics, fine twined linen, and purple ;
and of 
metal, in coinage, or in precious things that rust spoiled. Treasurewas kept underground, and there was the possibility of thieves diggingand so treasure would be lost. The moth, the rust, make thingsworthless. Thieves steal, and everything is gone. Remember thatthieves steal only things that are moth-eatable, and rust-consumable.
There are things of possession, treasures in heaven, “
where neither 
moth nor rust consume, and where thieves do not break through norsteal.” These things moths cannot touch, rust cannot corrode, thievescannot find. Oh, the foolishness, the stupidity of men and womenwho think riches consist in treasures on the earth. All the time the 
swift, silent messengers of destruction are breaking in upon it, andthe equally silent corrosive fire of Nature is biting into the metal anddestroying it. Presently we hear of burglary-thieves !
To repeatthe word, mark the fine satire of our Lord on the men who are notrich towards God, and who are proud of their accumulations. 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

Once again, He took the illustration of the eye. The subject He 

was illustrating was the necessity for singleness of motive in life, 

having one aim, purpose, passion. He ended this section by saying, 

“ 
Ye cannot serve God and mammon.” He says the eye is the lamp 

of the body, not the light of the body. Think of the human eye, and 

of its value. If there be no light the eye is quite useless. The light 

is not in the eye, but the eye is the means of interpreting the light and 

applying the light. The eye is that which regulates the motions of the 

body. It is wonderful how those denied the great blessing of sight 

have other senses sharpened. But those blind would be the first to 

admit that the natural order is that the eye is the lamp, in which the 

light shines, and through which things are seen because light is 

shining. 

Then with marvellous scientific accuracy, Jesus used two words 

as to the condition of the eye, the “
single ”
eye, and the “
evil ”
eye. 

The contrast is the more remarkable, in that it is not an exact contrast, 

which would have been single and double, or good and evil. 

The word “
single ”
is aplous,
which means single-folded, without 
a fold. If thine eye has no complications within itself. Anyone who 
has visited an oculist has probably heard him use the word astigmatism. 
I give the definition of an authority. “
An astigmatism is a structural 
defect of the eye so that rays of light do not converge to a point in the 
retina.” That means there is some fold there, something out of place, 
something complicated. The eye is not single. The single eye is the 
opposite of the eye suffering from astigmatism. Jesus said, If the 
eye is single, not folded over, nothing out of place, what then ?
Things 
are seen clearly, in right perspective, and the whole body is illumined,
it is ful1
of light. The eye is the lamp, and the light shines through 
it into the whole body, and there is nothing complicated. 

Then He gave the contrast. “ 
If thine eye be evil,” and the word 
is @oneros,
evil in influence. Now, He did not deal with the structure 
of the eye. That had been indicated in what had already been said. 
The single eye is never evil, poneros.
The word now indicates not 
merely an obliquity of vision, but that there is a squint. Everything 
is seen double. That eye is evil in its influence upon the one possessing 
it and upon others. The eye regulates the body, and if the eye is 
wrong, then all the light of God leaves such an one in darkness. 

What is meant by the single eye ?
“
No man can serve two masters. 
. . . Ye cannot serve God and mammon.” The teaching is the 
necessity for the unification of life at a centre, from which everything 
is viewed. So these first parabolic illustrations in the Manifesto all 
move in the realm of the ethical, and are concerned with the Kingdom, 
and the Kingship of God ;
and the responsibility of those who are in 
that Kingdom for the earth and for the world. 

PARABOLIC ILLUSTRATIONS IN THE MANIFESTO 17 

3. Parabolic Illustrations in the Manifesto 
Matthew vi and vii (2) 

AGAIN we take three groupings of illustrations, on three subjectsor themes :
the first, the birds and the lilies ;
the second, that of 
the mote and beam, and dogs and swine ;
the third, the loaf and stone,
the fish and serpent, or scorpion. Our Lord used all these as illustrations 
in His ethical teaching.
The birds and lilies are very familiar. What then was the subjectthe Master was illustrating ?
That of the futility of anxiety aboutnecessary things. In the former illustration of true wealth, the follyof laying up treasure destroyed by moth, rust, and stolen by thieves,
He was not looking at necessary things. If His subjects are not to becareful about laying up treasure on earth, there are things that areessential and necessary.
What are the necessary things ?
They are revealed in His teaching;
food, drink, raiment. Here He reduced everything to the last necessity.
The word raiment here covers more than the covering of the body.
Paul writing to Timothy says, “
Having food and covering we shall betherewith content.” Covering means not merely the covering of thebody, but covering of our personality, shelter, home. That also wassurely in the mind of our Lord. Things can be accumulated, withoutany home. However, keep to the simple ideas, food, drink, and raiment.
These are necessities to those in His Kingdom, until theconsumrhation. 
He insisted upon the futility of being anxious about thesenecessities in a threefold repetition of a phrase, “
Be not anxious.” 
The Authorized Version renders here, “
Take no thought ”
for food 
and drink and raiment, which is a little misleading. We are to take 
thought, but we are not to be anxious, That is the important word,
the anxiety which is car-king care, and that is unfruitful, feverish, andworrying. How constantly His subjects, submitted to His rule,
face these problems of food, clothing, and covering, necessary things,
until the anxiety reacts upon them, and they become hot and restless,
fretful and worried. 
There is a threefold movement in the teaching. He shows first that 
anxiety is unnecessary. The necessity is known to God. “
Your 
Father knoweth that ye have need.” Secondly, it is unworthy. Weare frittering away great forces that inspire life, on unworthy objects.
Direct that driving energy and urge of personality into its true line ofaction. By seeking the Kingdom and His righteousness, we shall betaking our powers, and spending them in that way. Lastly, with afine touch of satire, He says it is not only unnecessary and unworthy,
it is quite unfruitful. Worry does not get us anywhere, nor bring us 
2 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

anything. By taking thought we cannot add one cubit to our 

stature. 

The marginal reading for the word “
stature ”
is “
age ”
in the 

Revised Version. Either word carries the meaning. By worrying one 

cannot add a cubit to his stature, or live longer. See the playful irony 

of the word. Remember the teaching that has preceded this word ;
the supremacy of character, revealed in the beatitudes, that character 

as influence, salt, and light, followed by binding laws. We are still in 

the world, and must have food, drink, and raiment, necessary things. 

We are not to be anxious about these things. 

How shall we avoid anxiety ?
Jesus Iooked out upon the common, 

everyday things, the birds and the lilies, the Huleh lily of Palestine, 

varying from brilliant scarlet to a fine deep purple, one of the most 

gorgeous of the flowers, blooming there amid the fields where He was 

talking. Look at the birds as they nestle there in these trees, and as 

they fly. They have no intelligence that enables them to make pro
vision. They have no gathering power. They do not lay up in barns ;
but they are fed, and the Father feedeth them.

These are illustrations by contrast rather than similarity. If our 
heavenly Father feeds those whom He has not endowed with a capacity 
for thinking and planning and arranging and Iaying by in store, how 
much more likely He will feed those whom He has created with the 
capacity to lay up, and arrange, and plan. Man is intelligent, is made 
for forecasting, to arrange. He is created with the intellectual capacity 
that enables him to do what the birds cannot do. Our Father feeds 
the birds, notwithstanding their lack. He will feed us on the basis of 
our possessions. Man will use the faculties, but the greatness of his 
humanity, and all his cleverness will not feed him, unless God does so. 
The Lord was driving His listeners back to a recognition of the futility 
of worry and anxiety, teaching that the beings He has thus endowed 
and endued, using those powers so given, to such God always responds 
in supplying need. 

Then He looked at the flowers. He said, Look at them. God has 
garbed them, and all the glory of Solomon’s tine
twined linen and 
purple and flashing beauty do not compare with the beauty of those 
flowers. Is anyone inclined to think that here Jesus used rhetoric ? 
No, it is cold, scientific fact. Some day take a piece of the finest 
material ever employed in the making of garments of kings, the most 
beautiful and costly, and most delicately woven in the looms of 
humanity, and put it under the microscope. Then put under that 
same microscope a rose, a lily, any flower, a daisy plucked from the 
common sod. The material will be like sackcloth, its edges frayed.
The flower will be wonderful with all the efflorescent beauty of accuracy. 
God clothes the lilies, and Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like 
one of these. To us He has given power both to toil and to spin. How 
much more may we expect to be clothed by that God Who clothes the 

PARABOLIC ILLUSTRATIONS IN THE MANIFESTO 19 

lilies in that manner. To-day they are in the field. To-morrow theyare for burning, they are gone. We are for the eternities, and He hasgiven us power to toil, and to spin.

In these illustrations our Lord was not telling us not to think, forHe did not say, Take no thought. We were made to think, to gather,
to put by in barns, to learn how to toil and spin. Use these powers,
knowing that they are given by God, and that He will co-operate withus in all our gathering, in our toil, and spinning. It is quite unnecessarytherefore that we should have any anxiety about the things of necessity,
for the supreme thing here, that flames with beauty, is that ”
yourheavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of all these things.”

The second group of illustrations concerns one subject again. Themote and the beam, and dogs and swine. It is a curious conjunction,
but they are together, and are. kept together. The mote and thebeam illustrated one realm, and dogs and swine another, but theyare in the same possibility of action and activity in life. The subjectwhich our Lord was illustrating was that of the principles that areto actuate us in the exercise of judgment. The word “
judge ”
here 
has many meanings and applications. The Greek word is translatedin ten or eleven different ways, every one having some essentialthought, but with varied applications. When our Lord said here,
“ 
Judge not that ye be not judged,” the sense in which judgment isforbidden is the judgment that condemns. Discrimination, however, isnecessary, and is enjoined. His use of the mote and the beam shows 
us that we may use judgment wrongfully ;
and He charges us not todo that thing. His use of the dogs and swine shows how judgmentmust be exercised, and is somewhat terrible in application. Judgmentis necessary. As John records in another connection, He said once,
“ 
Judge not according to appearance, but judge righteous judgment.”
That was distinct instruction to exercise the power of distinction anddiscrimination, That is part of our human nature. But there is acensorious attitude of soul, in which judgment deteriorates into thejudgment of unfairness and condemnation, and that is what He 
forbids. In that connection He used these startling figures of the moteand the beam. The beam is something big, and the mote a tiny thing.
The word used for beam means a great massive piece of timber. The 
beam in the eye becomes almost grotesque by its bigness ;
and the 
mote, the little chip off the beam, cannot be seen, although it causessuffering. A man sees the mote in his brother’s eye. Jesus does not 
deny he may see it. He does see it. It is something wrong, that oughtnot to be there. But Christ says there is a beam in that man’s eye whois looking at his brother’s mote. The beam is not a vulgar sin. The 
man guilty of a great sin is never critical of a man who has committed

a little sin. 
Then what is the beam ?
That very spirit of censoriousness whichis watching for something in his brother, that blinds him to all the 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

facts of the case. Sins of the spirit are always worse than the sins of 
the flesh ;
and there is no sin so blasting, so blighting, so damning, as 
the spirit of censorious judgment of another man. Cast out that beam, 
said Jesus, get rid of that ;
then one will see how to take the mote out of 
the brother’s eye. Censoriousness dwells upon the mote, and criticizes 
the brother. That censoriousness is a beam that is blinding the man. 
Remove it and approach that same man in love, with the very spirit 
of Christ, and the brother will be helped to get rid of his mote in his 
eye. Judge, not in the spirit of censorious condemnation ;
for we shall 
be judged in the way we judge ;
that is the measure of our judgment. 

Then sharply, almost suddenly, He insisted upon the necessity for 
discrimination. “
Give not that which is holy unto the dogs, neither 
cast your pearls before the swine.” That is a tremendous saying, and 
a terrible one. If there is to be no hindering beam that prevents us 
from removing the mote, there is to be no blindness that prevents us 
from seeing corruption that is hopeless and helpless. We are not to 
take precious things, and give them to dogs, to cast our pearls before 
the swine. Peter doubtless heard that word, and at the end of his 
letter he spoke of people like dogs, returning to their vomit, and sows 
wallowing in the mire. There are such people, and Christ says we have 
no right to give such our treasure, our pearls. 

A tremendous application can be made of that, the necessity that 
the Church should guard her most holy things. In past history the 
Church gave over her sacred deposit to dogs, and cast her pearls before 
swine when she admitted government within her borders by pagan 
nations. She does it to-day whenever she compromises with the 
sacred things of her faith. 

The final illustrations here, the loaf, the stone ;
the fish, the serpent. 
The subject illustrated here was that of prayer, the way in which God 
gives as compared with the way of men, and men at their highest level, 
as fathers give. He had just uttered the tremendous word about 
freedom from censoriousness, and yet the importance of the power of 
discrimination that prevents handing over of sacred things to dogs 
and swine. Immediately there He said, “
Ask, and it shall be given 
you ;
seek, and ye shall find ;
knock, and it shall be opened unto 
you.” That has a wide and general application, but notice its placing 
in this ethical Manifesto. As one faces the difficulty of judging, and 
the fear to form any judgment, He says, The power-house is there, 
the light is there. “ 
Ask, seek, knock.” This is an ethical Manifesto. 
These are the laws of the Kingdom, and here prayer is enjoined as a 
necessity. Has any other code of laws included prayer as a necessity ?
I think none ;
and that is why they all break down. Jesus here 
introduced prayer, and shows how God gives. He will give. If they 
ask, they will receive. If they will seek, they shall find. If they 
knock, the door will be opened. 

Having said that, he went on, “
Which of you, being evil . . .
?
”
PARABOLIC ILLUSTRATIONS IN THE MANIFESTO zr
The immediate application is that God is not evil, and we are. Evil 
there means more than sinful. It includes everything of narrowness.
All we are, God is not. We, being evil, have the high capacity forgiving good things to our children. Then our Lord illuminated it all. 
Will a father for a loaf give a stone ;
for a fish, a serpent ?
How much 
more shall your Father God give good things to them that ask Him.
God gives the best, always the best, as they would give. He will never 
offer us a stone, even if we ask for a stone. He will give us bread. He 
will never offer us a serpent or a scorpion, if in foolishness we ask fora serpent. He will give good things. “
Ask, seek, knock.” That isthe dynamic centre of all ethics, because God is at the centre. Enteringinto this we can find the infinite machinery, with its wheels turning,
revolving ;
but at the centre of that wheel there is an axle, that of theheart of our Father. Oh, do not be anxious. Use judgment in accordance 
with the principles of God, and if we find it difficult, go into thepower-house, and ask, and seek, and knock. 

4.
Parabolic Illustrations in the Manifesto 
Matthew vi and vii (3) 

A
A
GAIN we take illustrations used by our Lord on three subjects;
first, that of two gates and two ways ;
secondly, that of wolves insheep’s clothing, and fruits ;
and thirdly, that of rock and sand.
In these final words of application, it would seem as though ourLord employed a crescendo, and reached a climax of illustration.
‘
the first, the figure of two gates and two ways, He was speakinggenerally of life, and life as a pilgrimage. The distinct ethical teachingnow being finished, He had reached the realm of application. There 
are two gates through which we may enter upon an experience of life.
He was bringing His hearers back to the starting-point, to the beginning 
of life. In order to travel uponthese ways, men must pass throughthese gates, the narrow or the wide. The narrow gate “
leadeth unto 
life.” The wide gate “
leadeth to destruction.” We have a plan of*pilgrimage
in these figures of speech.
There is a way of life into which man can pass through a wide gate.
It is easy of entrance, and there is a broad way stretching out before 
us. But there is another gateway, leading to another way ;
a narrow 
gateway, and a straitened way.
The wide gate “
leadeth to destruction,” and the word literally andsimply means narrowing limitation, confinement, imprisonment ;
until 
everything is brought to an end under crushing pressure.
On the other hand is the narrow gate. As we pass through it webegin to walk a straitened way, but it “
leadeth unto life,” in all itsfulness. There are many things which have to be left outside if we 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

pass through this gate. It is a narrow gate and a straitened way ;
none of the breadth of license, but the straitness of law. But go on, 

and walk along it, and we find all the way it is widening, broadening, 

expanding with new breadth and glory and view, until at last it reaches 

unto life. When Jesus said “
life ”
He did not mean mere existence. 

He meant eternal life, deep life, high life, broad life, full life. 

Two ways of life are thus presented. Any man reading that Sermon 

on the Mount has to hide himself as he stands in the light of His 

appalling measurements. A man can live by high devotion of his own 

life to the awful law of purity, and reach the glorious clear shining of 

health and holiness ;
but he must begin at the narrow gate. Thus the 

two ways of life’s pilgrimage are illustrated by the use of the gates and 

ways, to be interpreted in that way, and none other. 

Our Lord did not say that the way of evil is broad and easy and 

natural, and that it would work out rightly. “ 
Destruction” is the 

last word. He did not say the narrow way would mean narrowness 

constantly, the cutting out of everything worth while. No, it is the 

finding of everything worth whiIe
;
and at Iast it is life in all its breadth 

and length and beauty. The narrow and straitened way leads to 

breadth, to life. The wide and broad way leads to narrowness, and 

issues in destruction. 

In close connection He used the next figure of speech. If in the 

first He took His hearers to the point of beginning, the narrow and 

wide gates, and foretold the issue, He now brought them face to face 

with one of the gravest perils that would threaten them. “
Beware 

of false prophets.” In order to beware of them they must be tested. 

The subject illustrated was the testing of the prophets. This particular 

subject has its supreme application to those who are called of God to 

prophetic work, though our Lord’s first application was not for them, 

but for those who wait upon their ministry and teaching. 

What a descripiion 
of the false prophets. They come in sheep’s 
clothing, but inwardly are ravening wolves. Our Lord was dealing 
here with life, not with what we call orthodoxy or heterodoxy. These 
men are not those teaching a false doctrine. They may be teaching 
a perfectly correct doctrine, but if in their own lives they are wrong, 
beware of them. This is orthodoxy, dressed in sheep’s clothing, 
proceeding from one who in life is a ravening wolf. It is a perilous 
thing to follow such. He is now folIowing
those who have passed 
through the narrow gate along the road of progress, when they will 
need teachers, and guidance. He warns such to be careful to whom they 
give attention and allegiance. The prophets who destroy men’s lives 
are those who may be dressed in sheep’s clothing, but if they are evil, 
their influence is destructive. 

In the next saying of Jesus the figures seem to mix, but they do 
not ;
they merge. “ 
By their fruits ye shall know them.” That is 
twice repeated, and in between He emphasized the statement with a 

PARABOLIC ILLUSTRATIONS IN THE MANIFESTO 23 

question, ”
Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles ?
Even 

so every good tree bringeth forth good fruit ;
but the corrupt tree 

bringeth forth evil fruit. A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, 

neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit. Every tree that 

bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire.” 

Mark the drastic note of His declaration, “
A good tree cannot bring 

forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit.” 

The prophet may be in sheep’s clothing. There may be the outward 

appearance, but He warned those who have entered upon the highway, 

through the gateway that is narrow, to take heed how they hear. 

They are to be careful lest they be beguiled, all unknowingly;by
those 

who are false prophets. 

Our Lord then antedated the ultimate. He looked on to the day 
when all life should come to consummation and manifestation and 
judgment. He put Himself as Judge at the close. “
In that day many 
will say to Me, Lord, Lord, did we not prophesy by Thy Name ?
”
They had done many wonderful works in the Name, but He will have 
to say, “ 
I never knew you.” The peril of this halts us, and drives us 
not to discussion, but to heart-searching. I may prophesy in the 
Name. I may cast out demons in His Name. I may do many things 
in His Name ;
but if I do not know Him, and He does not know me 
personally, the last word is, “ 
I never knew you.” 

The final word is, “
He that doeth the will of My Father.” That is 
the final test of everything. He antedates in this figure of speech the 
hour when He shall appraise the life of those who are presented to 
Him. There will be those who have done everything except the one 
thing, the will of God. As He said on another occasion, Who is Mymother, who are My brethren and sisters ? They that do the will of 
My Father Who is in heaven. So He warns us to beware of false 
leaders, false prophets ;
who are to be tested by the fruit they bear. 

The last of these illustrations in the Manifesto is characterized by 
the same attitude of majesty. He took two figures, rock and sand,
and the subject He was illustrating was the importance of foundation 
in building life. It has reference to the whole Manifesto and to all the 
teaching that had preceded it. “
Every one therefore which heareth 
these words of Mine.” He had uttered the whole scheme of law in the 
Kingdom of God to those disciples. Others had heard Him. Now He 
declared that men who built on His words were building on rock 
foundation. 

Look at this carefully. Every man is building something. He is 
building something into which he can go and live, that will create for 
him a refuge, a place of rest, a home for his soul. The materials of the 
building may be correct, and as two houses go up, one cannot see any 
difference between them. Everything seems correct in both cases. 
Summer suns are shining, and they look beautiful, and no difference 
can be detected. But summer suns do not shine for ever. There come 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

days of storm and stress, of sweeping winds, and whistling howling 
rains, days of tempest. Look at those two houses, what is happening ?
One of them, under the pressure of the storm, is crumbling, falling, 
and the man is rendered homeless. The other is standing erect, firm,
and strong. What makes the difference ?
Foundations. One man 
built on the sand ;
the other upon rock. 

The figure of speech is so simple that a child can understand it. 
Christ says there are two foundations upon which we can build. If 
we want to build more stately mansions for the soul, watch the foundations. 
Notice carefully the words of august majesty. He that heareth 
and doeth, builds on rock. He that heareth and doeth not, builds on 
sand. It is not a comparison between a man who hears, and another 
who has never heard, Those who have heard and have not obeyed, 
have gone on with their building, neglecting the teaching ;
when the 
storms strike, the building is destroyed. Those who have heard, and 
have obeyed, and kept it, no storm that blows can destroy the house 
of such as have built on the teachings of Jesus. August in majesty, 
and final to His Manifesto is that figure of building on sand or on rock. 

All these illustrations were employed to emphasize ethical teaching, 
and illustrate moral standards in the Kingdom of God. According to 
these illustrations, it is immoral to live in this world, and not exert 
the influence of salt and light. We are not moral Christians if we are 
living without influencing others. It is immoral to live an earthcentred
life, with supreme care for things that moth and rust. destroy 
and thieves steal. We are searched by this teaching of Jesus. It is 
immoral to attempt to live a double-governed life, The eye which isthe lamp of the body must be single. It is immoral to worry overnecessary things. What an immoral crowd we are ! So wrote FayInchfawn
in a little poem, which has a touch of humour,
but it has 
searching power :
“
Well, I am done, my nerves were on the rack;
I’ve laid them down to-day.
It was the last straw broke the camel’s back ;
I’ve laid that down to-day.
And 1’11 not fume, nor fret, nor fuss, nor fight;
1
walk by faith a bit, and not by sight;
I think the Universe will work all right;
I’ve laid it down to-day: 

“
So, here and now, the overweight-the worryf
I’ll lay it down to-day.
The all-too-anxious heart, the tearing hurry;
I’ll lay these down to-day.
0 eager hands I 0 feet, so prone to run!
I think that He, Who made the stars and sun, 
Can mind the things you’ve had to leave undone; 
Do lay them down to-day I
”
PARABOLIC ILLUSTRATIONS 

In the illustration Jesus gave of the birds and lilies, we see that 
worrying is a form of immorality. It is immoral to exercise judgment 
wrongly, to cast out the mote in my brother’s eye, when the beam is 
in my own eye ;
or to take the precious things and cast them to dogs 
and swine. It is immoral to neglect prayer. Our Father gives the best. 
If we do not ask, seek, knock, our life is immoral. Of course it is 
immoral to travel on the wrong road, to take the wide gate and the 
broad way. It is immoral to listen to false prophets. It is immoral to 
build a dwelling for the soul on sand, when the rock of His teaching 
is at our disposal. These things all wonderfuhy
illustrate the great 
ethical standards of Jesus. 

5.
Parabolic Illustrations 
Matthew ix and x 

HE ILLUSTRATIONS in these chapters are found in a section of the

TGospel dealing with the servants of our Lord, and of His sending 

them forth. In the charge which He laid upon them, we find these 

parabolic illustrations : a marriage, the mending of a garment, and 

wine skins ;
the harvest ;
sheep and wolves, serpents and doves ;
sparrows ;
and the sword. The background here is not of ethical 

teaching, but of His working of wonders in the midst of human dere
liction, and of His commanding and calling and commissioning some 

to go out upon His great business. 

The first illustration was of a marriage feast (ix. 15).
What was 
the subject He was illustrating ?
The joy of His disciples and the 
reason for the joy. He used this illustration to account for the absence 
of an ascetic attitude towards life on the part of those round about 
Him. Here the disciples of John had come to Him and asked why His 
disciples did not fast as those of John and the Pharisees. I believe it 
was a sincere question. They had watched the disciples of Jesus, and 
had noticed an entire absence of ascetic practices, which they thought 
were of the essence of religion. Our Lord in reply, used this figure of 
the marriage, an Oriental figure. The ceremonies lasted for seven days 
of merriment and festivity. 

His application was simple. The sons of the bride-chamber never 
fast, or lack joy during these festivities. While the bridegroom is 
there, they do not fast. Applying the illustration directly to Himself, 
He said that was the reason why His disciples were a happy crowd. 
These men could not understand why, and Jesus gave them thereason-the Bridegroom was still with them. He then told them that 
presently He would be taken away, and then they would mourn. He 
there used a remarkable verb. The Bridegroom will be taken and 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

caught up, a word that marks exaltation. He was looking on to the

end when He would be lifted up.

The first part of His illustration has its application to us, but notthe second. How can the children of the bride-chamber mourn while 
the Bridegroom is with them ?
It cancels for ever anything in thenature of ascetic practices, in order to demonstrate loyalty. The absenceof the Bridegroom is the reason for mourning, but He is not absent,
and never has been since His victory, His resurrection, and ascension,
and return in power by the Spirit to take up His abode with His ownpeople. He was talking to His group of disciples later on in thoseintimate discourses, and said to them, “
And ye therefore have sorrow,
but I will see you again, and your heart shall rejoice, and your joy noone taketh away from you.” The application here is that the trueevidence of our relationship to Christ is our constant joy and rejoicing. 

“
0 happy day that fixed my choice,
On Thee, my Saviour, and my God.” 

That is the keynote of Christian experience. As we are in, fellowshipwith Christ, we know what it is to rejoice always, and again to rejoice.

In the same connection, and to the same men, He used the figureof the mended garment and wine skins, in order to make His meaningplainer. He was illustrating the nature of His Kingdom. Briefly thisis what He meant :
He could not crowd into an outworn formula the 
new things He was teaching men. He had come, not to mend an old 
garment, but to make a new one. Therefore new methods were necessary 
;
and among them were these that they could not understand,
the very happiness, which was the demonstration of the new method.

If we put a piece of a new garment on an old, the rent is made 
greater. The garment cannot be mended in that way. The illustration 
of the wine skins illuminates and enforces the same truth. The new 
demands the new. “
Wine skins ”
is a correct translation, skins usedas bottles. Wine, when fermentation is complete, can be put into anybottles, whether new or old, without harming bottles or wine skins,
and without harm to it. Wine, intended to ferment, would burst anybottles, whether new or old. Those two statements being understood,
then unfermented wine must be put into new bottles. To put it intoold bottles would produce fermentation, which is always a sign ofbreakdown. 

Thus our Lord was teaching that to put His enterprise into theold formulae would bring about decomposition and ruin. When wehave taken the claim and teaching and power and work of Jesus, andhave tried to press them into some other form than His, it has deteriorated, 
as fermented wine. To those who objected to the merrimentof His disciples He replied that the very merriment was inevitablewhile He was with them ;
and the whole system He was creating, wasnot something crowded into the old, but was something new. 

PARABOLJC ILLUSTRATIONS 

We come next to that marvellous figure of the harvest (ix. 37,
38).

Notice the subject illustrated. He used the figure to His disciples

when He was preparing them, appointing them, and charging them.

It reveals his own
outlook on His work. The figure in itself is suggestive,

and needs no elaboration. Harvest is always the result of previous

activity, is the victory of that activity, and is also a call to activity.

Can there be anything more disastrous than an ungathered harvest?
Wherever He clothes the smiling fields with corn, they are asking men

to garner them, to bring in the corn.

We have here a remarkable background. Matthew says that He

went about all the cities and villages, teaching, preaching, and healing;
and when He saw the multitudes He was moved with compassion for

them, for they were distressed and scattered, as sheep having no

shepherd. Why had He compassion on these multitudes ?
Because 

He saw them as others did not see them. His vision of the crowd was 

of a multitude distressed and scattered, without a shepherd, a flock of

sheep harried by the wolves, and fleeced ;
fainting, wounded, bleeding,

dying. It was our Lord’s picture of the condition of the multitudes,

in spite of their professions, and supposed orthodoxies to religion.

With that background in mind, He said harvest. Could two more 
apparently contradictory figures be put together ?
A flock of sheep,
fainting, wounded, dying, and harvest. Here is the deep truth concerning 
His mission. Human need, distress, and dereliction constitutesharvest for Him and for His workers. Wherever the day is darkest,
wherever the need is sorest, wherever human government is at itsworst, there the fields are white to harvest for the Christ of God. So 
He said to His disciples before He called and commissioned them. He 
knew the distressed and awful condition of humanity, but He didnot say it was a hopeless case ;
but that it was harvest, and wasplenteous.

In the next illustration He spoke of sheep and wolves (x. 16).
Again to His disciples He said, “
Behold, I send you forth as sheep inthe midst of wolves.” Take another figure with that, “
Be ye thereforewise as serpents, and harmless as doves.” He was illustrating now thework that lay immediately ahead of His disciples. This tenth chapterneeds careful reading. In His commission to the twelve He saw three 
periods of service ahead, the immediate, then that which should followHis departure ;
and then beyond. In this first period we see what was 
before them. “ 
I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves.”
The wolves were those preying upon the people, and were producingthat state of weariness and weakness, wounding and fleecing. Markthe “ 
therefore.” “
Be ye therefore wise as serpents, harmless asdoves.” Wise as serpents. Note, it is the wisdom of the serpent,
not its poisonous capacity. It is the harmlessness of the dove, notits helplessness. Our Lord chose His words carefully to show whatHe meant. His disciples were going out to serve the needs of the 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

sheep, into the midst of wolves. His workers are harmless only as

they are wise, and wise when they are harmless. Any man going out 

upon the Master’s business who lacks wisdom, is not harmless. Any

man going out is not wise unless he is harmless. These are the two 

great qualifications for going out into a hostile world, facing the

wolves that have destroyed the sheep. There are times too when His 

business demands our fighting with the wolves, as well as shepherding

the sheep.

He then used that exquisite figure of the sparrows (x.29-31).
Talking to the same men, He was illustrating God’s tender care of 
His messengers. “
Not a sparrow falleth on the ground without yourFather.” Do not spoil that in quoting it, without your Father’s 
knowledge !
If the sparrow sickens and dies in winter frost, or summerheat, and it falls to the ground, and with a tremor in its feathers wesay it is dead, yes, but God was there. It died upon the bosom ofGod. “ 
Ye are of more value than many sparrows.” As His messengersgo out to fight the wolves they may be killed ;
they go out as sheepin the midst of wolves. They need the wisdom of the serpent, combinedwith the harmlessness of the dove. As they go, however, the FatherWho cares is with them. He Who is with the dying sparrow will bewith them, even if their service leads them to the place of death.

“
Think not that I came to send peace on the earth. I came not 
to send peace, but a sword ”
(x. 34). At that point our Lord wasillustrating the effect produced by His enterprise and work. Hiswork, and theirs through Him, would be divisive. It would mean 
the break-up of households. The sword here ‘means that His work 
would be divisive ;
but loyalty to Him and to His enterprises mustbe the supreme thing, calling for complete devotion.

Our Lord’s references to a sword are very interesting. Of course 
the ultimate meaning of His mission is peace. But here He was speaking 
of the importance of the effect of the process of His work. “
I came 
not to send peace, but a sword.” He used the figure again whenpredicting the coming judgment of Jerusalem (Luke xxi. 24). Againat the end He used it a remarkable way (Luke xxii. 36). When His 
disciples said, “ 
Lord, behold, here are two swords,” He said, “
It is 
enough,” so dismissing the subject. They had failed to understandthat He was emphasizing that which He had already said, that theywould go out on their mission, a divisive mission. When they now said,
“ 
Here are two swords,” He was not telling them that two were enough,
but He was dismissing the subject. Again in the Garden Peter wassternly rebuked, Put up thy sword into its sheath, that material swordof thine, for they that take the sword shall perish with the sword. He 
came to send a sword in that sense, of the breaking up of households;
yet He came also to make households, and to gather them together.
But because His teaching would be contrary to all the impulses of thehuman soul, inevitably there would be division. That has gone on ever 

PARABOLIC ILLUSTRATIONS “9 

since. All His workers have found the sword, dividing and setting intodifferent camps.

All these illustrations have moved in the realm of humanity’s 
need, and of His conception of what that work really means ;
and 
of His call to those who follow Him, to follow according to His own 
purpose. 

6. Parabolic Illustrations 
Matthew xi and xii 

N THEsEtwo
chapterswe have the story of happenings in the ministry 
I of Jesus during the period when the twelve were away from Himon their first mission. The eleventh chapter opens, “
And it came to 
pass, when Jesus had made an end of commanding His disciples, Hedeparted thence to teach and preach in their cities ”
;
that is, in thecities of the twelve apostles. While they were sent on a wider missionand over a wider area, He went to the cities from which these twelvehad come. 

Taking the section from chapter twelve to the middle of chaptersixteen, we are in that period of His ministry when He was enforcingHis claims against the opposition of the rulers, which by this time wasgrowing. In these two chapters, eleven and twelve, we have sixparabolic illustrations :
of the reed and the man in soft raiment ;
children playing in the market-places ;
a sheep in a pit on a Sabbath 
day ;
a tree and the fruit it grows ;
Jonah, a historic illustration;
and, finally, that weird and wonderful illustration of an empty house,
and the dispossessed spirit.

Beginning first with the subject illustrated, and our Lord’s use of 
it, take those of the reed and a man in soft raiment. Simply andnaturally He was illustrating the greatness of His forerunner, John,
and that by contrast. John was now imprisoned, and he had sent toJesus that enquiry through his disciples. This showed how alert and 
keen he was, and yet also how strangely perplexed. 

“
Art Thou He that cometh,
or look we for another ?
”
Jesus answered, and answered wonderfully, and when the messengershad been sent back, He used these illustrations in the presence of thecrowds, two illustrations, and a direct word about the prophet.

Look at the illustrations. In that listening crowd there were undoubtedly 
those who would be impressed when they heard John’s 
enquiry, and might be inclined to think of John as wavering. Some 
to-day say this was so, and that it was produced by his depression inthe prison. I do not think so. John’s enquiry meant rather that hedid not understand the method of Jesus. However the crowd might 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

‘be inclined to think that John, the great forerunner, whose message 
and mission had led up to the work of Jesus, was hesitating, was 
halting, was weakening, Christ, with that strange and yet wonderful 
nobility that characterized all His dealings, saved John from misapprehension. 
Said He, What did you go out to the wilderness to 
see ?
Did you think you would find in the wilderness a reed, shaken 
by the wind ?
Perhaps they were thinking at that moment that John 
was vacillating, was being blown about by the winds sweeping over 
his life. A reed is always the emblem of weakness. There in the 
Jordan valley it was a beautiful thing to look at, often growing twenty 
feet in height, but it was always slender and weak, and as the winds 
swept across the valley the reeds were agitated, because they were 
unstable. Jesus said, Is that what you went out to see ?
He did not 
answer His own enquiry, nor add anything to it. 

Again He said, Did you go out to see a man in soft raiment ?
Soft 
raiment was the emblem of enervation. Writing to the Corinthians 
Paul used that word which here is rendered “ 
soft raiment,” 
“ 
effeminate,” and that undoubtedly was its meaning. Did you go 
out to see a man in soft raiment ? Here Jesus used two Greek words, 
in which the letters are exactly the same, differently arranged. A 
reed, kalamos ;
a man in soft raiment, malakos. Had they gone out 
to see a kalamos, or a malakos ; a reed blown about with every breeze, 
or an enervated man, a man in soft raiment ? To that second suggestion 
He did add a most illuminative word. 

“ 
Behold, they that wear soft raiment are in kings’ houses,” kings’ 
palaces. John was in a king’s prison. If he had been a man in soft 
raiment he would not have been in prison, he would have been in apalace. Mark the satire of it. Did you go out to see a man capable of 
being shaken with the wind ? Did you go out to see a man in whose 
life there was a prostitution of virility for personal pleasure ? Those 
familiar with John would know no reed was he, no effeminate dilettante, 
hanging on at the courts of kings for the gratification of their lusts. 
The very suggestion was enough. They went out to see a prophet, 
but he was far more than a prophet. So with great dignity our Lord 
defended John from the possibility of misunderstanding. 

We gather therefore that there are two characteristics that disqualify 
any man for prophetic work. What are they ?
Weakness that 
yields to every passing wind that blows, or such self-indulgence as can 
be expressed only when they wear soft raiment. 

When Jesus had defended John, He talked about the generation in 
the midst of which He was doing His work. In this figure of the children 
playing in the market-place, the subject He was illustrating was that 
of the unreasonableness of that age. It was a homely and beautiful 
figure. There He was in the cities of the twelve, while they were on 
their mission, preaching ;
and He suddenly illustrated the fact that 
His preaching, and the preaching of John, whom He had just defended, 

PARABOLIC ILLUSTRATIONS 
was preaching to an age that was characterized by its unreasonableness.
I think this might also be applied to this age in which we are living.
What is the figure ?
Children playing at marriages and funerals.
Children were playing in the streets, in the market-place, probably atsetting sun, when market was over, and the day was waning, and thebairns were getting tired. Some of them wanted to play at a wedding,
and the others would not. Then they changed, and they said, Let usplay then at a funeral. No, they would not do that. You will not 
mourn to John’s wailing, and you will not dance to My piping. John 
came with the stern, hard, ascetic and profoundly necessary message,
calling men to repentance, and you say he has a demon, and you will 
not listen. I have come with such humanness that men say of Me, I 
am a gIuttonous
Man, and a winebibber, a friend of publicans andsinners. It was the age that would not mourn to John’s wailing, andwould not dance to Jesus’ piping. Or we could turn that round, andsay this, John would not dance to their piping, and Jesus would notmourn to their wailing. It was an unreasonable age. The harder,
sterner, severer note was denounced as being the utterance of a manwho was demon-possessed. The tender, human, and happy note ofJesus was refused because it lacked the ascetic note. John lacked the 
human touch, and they said he had a demon. Jesus seemed to lack 
the harder and the ascetic outlook on life, and they said, Do not listento Him, He is a gluttonous Man and a winebibber. Christ ended all 

by
saying,
“ 
Wisdom is justified by her works,” as in the Revised ;
and some MSS. render it, “ 
justified by her children.” The principle 
is the same. Wisdom knows the necessity for the real reason ofmourning, and the true inspiration of dancing, and she is justified inher methods as they are presented to men.
Again in this twelfth chapter, verses eleven and twelve, we havethat simple figure of speech of a sheep fallen into a pit on the Sabbathday. What was the subject our Lord was illustrating ? Many applications 
can be made of it, but here He was showing the dishonesty oftraditionalism, the dishonesty of these men of His own time who weretraditionalists. In that same chapter when passing through the cornfields, 
the question was raised, and now again when He healed a manon the Sabbath, Luke shows that it was on another Sabbath, but 
Matthew puts the two incidents close together. It was the Sabbath, 
and the traditionalists’ attitude towards the Sabbath was marked bytheir question about the disciples, and the question of what Jesuswould do on the Sabbath. What He did to that cripple gave rise to thefigure of speech.
We know how constantly our Lord flung Himself against thebondage of traditionalism because it overlay the law of God. What 
a distinction He drew. They taught for commandments of God thetraditions of men, and neglected the great matters of the law. Go 
back to that age. They had the law of God as it had come to them 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

through Moses, the written law in their Scriptures. To that they had 

added the oral law. Now the oral law consisted of interpretations of 

the written law by the Great Synagogue, that was called Abhoth, 

which means Fathers. The opinions of the Fathers constituted tradi
tion laid upon them, and were attempts to interpret the actual law. 

Again, from these traditions which they called Abhoth, they had 

another section called Toldoth, and Toldoth meant descendants. These 

were rules deduced from the interpretations of the Fathers, supposedly 

resulting from the law itself. The result was tradition heaped upon 

tradition, which had bound upon the people intolerable burdens. 

Take this matter of the Sabbath, in illustration. The law said that 
on the Sabbath there should be no manner of work. The Abhoth, or 
the Fathers, in this application said, Reaping and threshing are both 
work ;
therefore reaping and threshing must not take place on the 
Sabbath. Then going down to Toldoth, they said, Plucking the earsof corn with the hand is reaping, and rubbing them is threshing. That 
is why the Pharisees objected to what the disciples were doing. Their 
secondary interpretation of the law was that if the disciples plucked 
ears of corn and rubbed them, they were breaking the law, they were 
reaping and threshing. It is very natural, and quite possible. People 
even to-day are mastered by tradition in stupid matters, and in religion ;
something the fathers said, which was said sincerely, and the sons 
have come along and taken what the fathers said, and they have added 
something to it, and the result has been all manner of futile, stupid, 
ridiculous laws governing men. 

These Pharisees were criticizing Jesus, and wondering what He 
would do on the Sabbath with the crippled man ;
and He said, Which 
of you, having a sheep fallen into a pit on the Sabbath day, would notdraw it out. Many of them, if they had seen a sheep that had fallen 
into a pit, would not have drawn it out on the Sabbath ;
but if the 
sheep had been their own, they would !
That is the whole point. Which 
of yoz1,
having one of your own sheep fallen into a pit, would you not 
pull it out on the Sabbath ?
How much more is a man better than a 
sheep ! 
This man is God’s property. The sheep is yours. You have 
one law which you observe for your own personal property, and another 
that you observe for God’s property. A sheep, if it is yours, you would 
deliver. A man, if he is God’s man afflicted, you say the Sabbath is 
broken if he is delivered. The final application was that He took the 
man and He healed him. The man because the property of God was 
sacred, and was restored to sanctity as Jesus healed him. Traditionalism 
is dishonesty. 

Then in verses thirty-three to thirty-five we have the illustration 
He had already used in the ethical Manifesto, of the tree and fruit. 
The subject illustrated was the dishonesty of His enemies. Here we 
are in the realm of controversy. He was enforcing His claims againstopposition. These men were dishonest. They were attributing good 

PARABOLIC ILLUSTRATIONS 

fruit to an evil source. They were going so far as to suggest He was 
casting out the demons by the prince of the demons. His victory over 
Satan was declared to be complicity with Satan, In effect Christ said 
to them, Be honest. Judge Me honestly, as though He had said, by 
the fruits. 

Then He immediately applied His illustration to them, and declared 
that they were incapable of honesty, for that is the meaning of the 
explanation, “
How can ye, being evil . . . ?
”
He called them to 
consider this illustration of the tree and its fruit in application to 
Himself and His work. He appealed to these men to test Him, and 
to find
out the secret of His ability, by the things at which they were 
looking, the things done, by the fruit produced. 

At the fortieth and forty-first verses, again, these men were asking 
for a sign from heaven. It is an amazing thing to read, considering 
all He had done in healing the man. Yet they said they would like 
a sign from heaven. He used the historic sign of Jonah. What was 
the subject He was illustrating there ?
He was showing the valuelessness 
of a sign as a credential ;
but there was the ultimate value of one 
inevitabIe
and overwhelming sign. Notice in this connection He 
declined to give them any sign except one that they had in their own 
literature, that they could read, and interpret only as He used it in 
application to Himself. There shall no sign be given but the sign of 
the prophet Jonah. As He addressed them He revealed the secret 
of their seeking a sign. “
An evil and adulterous generation seekethafter a sign.” Evil, poneros,
harmful ;
and adulterous, faithless ;
marking their relationship to God, appearing in the figures of the Old 
Testament of the betrothal of God’s people to Himself. Jesus toldthese rulers, asking Him for a sign, calling Him Teacher, while not 
obeying what He had to say, asking in mockery for some spectacular 
sign from heaven; I know the meaning of your question. You are 
evil, and you are adulterous. The effect of your life upon others is 
harmful, because you are out of harmony with God, and are infidel. 
There is no sign that shall be given to you except the sign of the prophet 
Jonah., for as Jonah was three days and three nights in the belly of 
the fish, so shall the Son of man be three days and nights in the heartof the earth. The Scriptures never say whale, but a “ 
great fish.” 
Some men are so busy with the tape measure trying to find out whether 
a man could get inside a fish, they never plumb the depths of Deity. 
The book of Jonah says that “ 
God prepared a great fish.” Jonah 
was a sign to Nineveh. There is no meaning in that sign if the story 
was not true. It demands the historicity of the story of Jonah. How 
was Jonah a sign to Nineveh ?
The crew of the vessel had flung him 
overboard reluctantly. Undoubtedly they were a fine body of men. 
They did not want to do so, but he was insistent. To them he was 
dead, and gone. Then they reached the land, and the man they had 
flung to death appeared in Nineveh, preaching. That strange and 

3 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

mystic sign of a man coming back from the dead to preach to Nineveh 

produced a repentance in Nineveh, that spared it for a hundred years.

Jesus took these men back in their history, and predicted the future

concerning Himself.

Once before in the earlier days of ministry, as John records, theyasked Him for a sign. The answer He gave those rulers was, “
Destroythis temple, and in three days I will raise it up.” That is exactly thesame thing. The only sign of the divinity of His mission, and of theinterpretation of His personality will be found through His death andHis resurrection. This was a great word He uttered. Whether anyone 
caught the significance of it at the time we do not know ;
but there 
remains the record for us, and for all time, to show that the spectacularthing these men wanted He never granted ;
and indeed, so evident is 
it, that during His ministry, repeatedly when some miracle had beenwrought, out of His compassion of heart, He charged people not totalk about it. 

The last illustration is in verses forty-three to forty-five. It isimportant to notice that whatever the illustration was, the applicationwas to that generation. That does not exclude an application of itto personal and individual lives. He was, however, speaking to thatgeneration, in the midst of which He had been conducting His ministry,
following upon that of John. The whole of John’s ministry, and thatof Jesus, had had the effect of casting out of evil spirits. It was a 
cleansing, purifying, exorcising ministry. That was what our Lordwas illustrating. He took this story of a house which had becometenantless. The whole emphasis in His description of that house wasHis account of how the returning demon found it. “
He findeth it 
empty, swept and garnished.” Yes, but empty. He was speaking ofHis generation, an evil generation, swept and garnished by the teachingof His predecessor and His own teaching, but not possessed, empty.
He was emphasizing the fact that if that or any other generation is leftlike that, it may become the home of demons sevenfold. The illustrationis that of the danger of a tenantless house.

The application was to that generation. The house was freed fromevil mastery for a while, but it was empty. It lacked a new possessor.
It lacked a master in place of the one exorcised and the empty housewas the opportunity for the re-entry of the demon, reinforced sevenfold. 
We must take it, and make application of it to ourselves, or toan age. Reformation without regeneration is no use. Oh, we maysweep the house, and garnish it, and improve certain conditions bycreating a new environment but unless there is a new possessor, a newLord, a new Master, instead of the old demon, the demons will returnwith sevenfold force. Reformation is ultimately of no value alone.
It is only preparation for worse desolation. The only possible cure fora man or an age is reformation, followed by regeneration and theincoming of the new Lord and Master. That is so with the individual. 

THE GENERAL SCHEME 35 

7. The General Scheme 
Matthew xiii
T
T
HIS chapter contains at some length our Lord’s explanation of His 

reason for using the parabolic method, and it is of vital importance 

and interest. Chronologically in the ministry of Jesus the record in 

this chapter marks a stage in that ministry when our Lord turned 

largely to the parabolic method when dealing with the multitudes, 

employing it also with His own disciples. This chapter contains eight 

parables, all delivered on the same occasion, though not as one set 

discourse. That fact is proven by the fifty-third verse. This study 

then is of the nature of a general survey, important to a more detailed 

consideration. 

At the seaside Jesus gave the first complete parable, that of the 

sower, and He gave an explanation of that parable in answer to 

the request of His disciples, doubtless also given in the hearing of 

the multitudes. Following that explanation, He uttered three other 

parables, still by the seaside, sitting in the boat, while the multitudes 

thronged the shore. At the thirty-sixth verse we see that He left the 

multitudes, and went into the house. The first thing that happened 

in the house was that again, in answer to the request of His disciples, 

He explained one of the parables, the second that He had uttered in 

public. Then He gave to them, in the house, four other parables. 

To take a general survey. We find in these parables the King’s 
own view of His Kingdom as to its history in the age which He had 
then initiated. These parables, pictures, stories reveal His view of 
the Kingdom, not in its eternal and abiding sense, but in its history in 
the age which He had initiated by His coming into the world. 

The first of these parables simply reveals the nature of His mission, I
It
is the parable of the sower. The second parable begins with the 
words, “ 
The Kingdom of heaven is likened unto.” The first parable 
has no such reference, and He never again used this particular phrase 
in this chapter, but said, “ 
The Kingdom of heaven is like.” Here in 
the second parable the phrase might be rendered, The Kingdom of 
heaven has become like. In that introduction the phrase shows our 
Lord was thinking of the Kingdom of heaven as an abiding fact, but 
one that changed in its conditions and in its expression. The Kingdom 
of heaven has become like ;
there was a change through His own 
coming, and He shows the nature of the change. 

Then the next five parables, two uttered in public and three in 
private, all begin, “ 
The Kingdom of heaven is like.” Here is the general 
character of the change, and the result thereof. These are the pictures 
of a definite period. The limit is found in two verses, thirty-nine and 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

forty-nine, when our Lord spoke of the end of the age, not of the 

world, an unhappy translation. When some people talk of the end 

of the world they mean a cataclysm, an annihilation, and a ceasing 

to be. That is not what our Lord meant. He spoke of “
the consum
mation of the age.” A period of time was in His view. 

Our Lord spoke here to illumine, not to becloud, to illustrate, and 

to lure men towards the mystery through the symbol. Therefore 

these parables should be considered on the simplest level. Taking 

the symbols, and mastering them, we touch the sublime. 

The second canon is that the application should be restricted to 

the period of time which was in view. To fail to do that is to fail to 

understand what our Lord was intending to teach. They are pictures 

of one age, beginning with His first advent, and ending with His 

second advent, of the period in which we are living to-day. This restric
tion of application will save us from stupid blunders being made to-day 

about the work of the Church, and of the condition of the world. 

Again in studying the figurative teaching of Jesus, we find His 
consistent use of such figurative terms. They are never mixed. I 
would go further and say that applies to the whole Bible. The figurative 
language of the Bible is always consistent with basic principles. 

In our general survey of these parables in this chapter, the Kingdom 
is viewed in its progress in this age among men. Those spoken to 
the multitude present the Kingdom process from the human viewpoint. 
In the second group of parables, spoken to the disciples, the same age 
is in view, but the Kingdom is seen from the Divine aspect. 

In the first four parables, those presenting the human viewpoint, 
our Lord described two antagonistic forces at work in human history. 
He not only referred to these forces, but He made it perfectly clear 
that there would be long and continuous conflict between them. Taking 
those four parables, the apparent issue is the victory of evil, on the 
earth level, and the human standpoint. Remember, He was looking 
at the processes of the Kingdom as He saw them, and portraying God’s 
vision of that period. 

In the parable of the sower and the seed, the work of the King is 
seen, scattering men of the Word in order to produce Kingdom results. 
Sons of the Kingdom are scattered, in whom the Word is incarnate, so 
as to produce Kingdom results ;
and the results of victory seem to be 
very small ;
for there is the work of the enemy, the injury of the seed 
through the soil, to prevent the fruit of the Kingdom. 

In the next parable there are two sowings. Again the King is the 
Sower, sowing His field with the sons of the Kingdom. At the same 
time the work of the enemy is that of sowing the field with sons of the 
evil one. Wheat and darnel, that weed of the East so aIike
in its 
growth to wheat that experts can hardly detect the difference in its 
early stage.

In the third parable the Kingdom is presented as a mustard tree, 

THE GENERAL SCHEME 37 

an unnatural growth, a manifestation of earthly greatness which is not 

in harmony with the intention of the King, in the false values that 

will be manifested. 

Once more, the leaven in the meal, the introduction of a principle 

of decomposition and disintegration, with the result of external 

corruption and paralysis. Those are our Lord’s four pictures of 

Kingdom processes, spoken to the crowds ;
and that view harmonizes 

with the history of nineteen hundred years, and all the newspapers of 

to-morrow morning. 

When we turn to the second group of parables, after He had gone

into the house, we find Him talking to the men immediately round 

Him, who were to be responsible for His enterprise in the world, and 

He was showing them the Kingdom as viewed from the Divine stand
point. Here the one activity running through them all, and in every 

case the complete success of that activity, both in the ending of the 

age which He was initiating, and in the processes of the Kingdom which 

He was describing. Then that which in evil had seemed to be victorious 

is destroyed ;
and that which has been the purpose of the King is 

brought to a glorious finality and realization. 

The parable of the treasure in the field, the latent possibilities of 
the field. The field is the world. There is the purchase of the whole 
field at cost. That is the Divine attitude. The pearl in the field, with 
its latent possibilities, and amid the treasure, one supreme treasure ;
and there is a personal sacrifice in order to secure possession of that 
treasure. Again that is the Divine outlook. Some of us have sung in 
old days, with much enjoyment, 

“ 
I’ve found the Pearl of greatest priceI
My heart doth sing for joy;
And sing I must, for Christ is mineI
Christ shall my song employ.” 

That is beautiful and very true, but that is not what this means. Christ 
here is not the pearl. His Church is the pearl. Remember, this man, 
this merchant sold everything in order to possess the treasure. What 
have we to sell that is worth anyt
?
Nothing !
Again, the parable 
of the drag-net. No hand is spoken of as flinging out that drag-net. 
It swings in the tide. That is the Divine action, and He is flinging out 
that drag-net. That is the method of the age, and all conditions of 
people are included therein, all sorts of fishes ;
but there is a final 
discrimination. In each case when referring to the consummation, or 
final discrimination, our Lord shows the finality will be supernatural. 
It will not be in men’s hands at all, but in the hands of angels. Angels 
are the reapers. Angels pull in the net and sort the fishes. At Casarea 
Philippi
when Jesus first told His disciples about His Cross and His 
Church and His coming, He said that the Son of man should come in 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

the clouds with all the holy angels. There is a supernatural ending

for the age, in which angels actually take part under His direction,

in the affairs of men. 

When He had finished His seven parables, He looked at that little 

group of men and said, Have you understood these things ?
They

said, Yes. They evidently understood in such a measure as to make it

possible for Christ to utter one more parable, showing their responsi
bilities about all these things, as scribes, instructed to the Kingdom of

heaven. 

It was a great day when He began uttering parables :
four to the 
crowds, and four to His own. The first four revealed the processes ofthe Kingdom through an age, on the human level. Three revealed the 
processes of the Kingdom from the Divine viewpoint, of the Divinepurpose and standard ;
and the final one showed the responsibility ofHis own in view of that view of the Kingdom.

If any should believe that the whole world is to be converted andchanged, and presently be transformed as the result of their work, theyare blind. Christ is against such a belief, History is against it. Theactivities in the world to-day are against it. When we see this movement 
through this age from the Divine standpoint, then the heart is atrest as to the issue. The final parable here reveals the importance ofthe fact that we are scribes, instructed in the Kingdom of heaven.
We must have the Master’s conception if we are to serve the Kingdomwithout fret, without fever, without failing in quiet calm strength. 

8. The Sower 
Matthew xiii :
3-g
and 18-23 

HE FIRST parable of the Sower is one of two which our LordTHimself explained. Herein lies the great value of the twoparables. We are not left to any speculation as to what our Lordmeant, because of the record of His explanation of them to Hisown disciples.

First let us see the picture which He presented, that of a sower;
then consider His explanation of that story, as He told it to the crowds,
and from these two careful considerations finally deduce the instructionwhich they convey for us.

The picture of the sower is perfectly natural, but with Easternrather than Western colour.
There are senses in which those born and 
brought up in the country are familiar with a sower going forth tosow, at least as it used to be done. We know the picture of the sowerin our own land. Yet we come to clear apprehension of the story onlyas we remember that this was in the East. In Thomson’s Land
and 

THE SOWER 

the
Book he therein described the sower in the Eastern lands very 
clearly, as he wrote :
“ ‘ 
Behold, a sower went forth to sow.’ There is a nice and close adherence 
to actual life in this form of expression. These people have actuallycome forth all the way from June to this place. The expression implies thatthe sower, in the days of our Saviour, lived in a hamlet, or village, asall
these farmers now do ;
that he did not sow near his own house, or in a 
garden fenced or walled, for such a field does not furnish all the basis ofthe parable. There are neither roads, nor thorns, nor stony places in suchlots. He must go forth into the open country as these have done, wherethere are no fences ;
where the path passes through cultivated land ;
where thorns grow in clumps all around ;
where the rocks peep out inplaces through the scanty soil ;
and where also, hard by, are patchesextremely fertile. Now here we have the whole four within a dozen rods 
of us. Our horses are actually trampling dciwn some seeds which havefallen by this wayside, and larks and sparrows are busy picking them up.
That man, with his mattock, is digging about places where the rock is toonear to the surface for the plough ;
and much that is fallen there will 
wither away, because it has no deepness of earth. And not a few seeds 
have fallen among this bellan,
and will be effectually choked by this mosttangled of thorn bushes. But a large portion, after all, falls into reallygood ground, and four months hence will exhibit every variety of crop.” 

Keeping that Eastern picture in mind, look at the picture first 

generally. There are four things in the story as Jesus told it that arrest 

attention ;
first, the sower ;
secondly, the seed ;
thirdly, the soil ;
and, lastly, the sequence. 

Then we are concerned with our Lord’s explanation of the picture. 
Notice that the sower is not named. He began bluntly, “
Behold, a 
sower went forth to sow.” It was an actual fact, but so far as the 
teaching is concerned, He did not name the sower, neither did He do 
so in His explanation. He did not say who the sower was who sowed 
the seed. However, going to the thirty-seventh verse we read this. 
When the disciples asked Him to explain the parable of the tares, He 
said, “ 
He that soweth the good seed is the Son of man.” That applie 
equally to this parable of the sower. 

Notice in the next place that the chief value of the picture is the 
seed and its relation to the soil. These things are foundation principles, 
to be borne in mind as we approach the detailed study of these wonderful 
parables. The sower is not referred to, but unquestionably the 
Lord was referring to Himself as He said, ”
He that soweth the good 
seed is the Son of man.” 

Then again, bear in mind there is one Sower, and one soil. The 
Sower is the Son of man. What is the soil ?
He does not name it. 
The hard highway, the thorns, the rock, do not constitute soil. The 
ground does. If we would know what the soil is once again we trespass 
upon the next parable. Following the statement in verse thirty-seven, 

4Q
PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

“ 
He that soweth good seed is the Son of man,” He says, “
and the 
field is the world.” Let us keep that carefully in mind.

We are next impressed by the fact that there are various conditionsof the seed, and various responses of the soil. As our Lord explainedHis parable, when He referred to the seed, He did so by speaking of 

persons. These words of explanation are found, beginning at the 
nineteenth verse, 

“
When any one heareth the word of the Kingdom, and understandethit not, then cometh the evil one, and snatcheth away that which hathbeen sown in his heart. This is he that was sown by the wayside.” Verse 

20
:
“ 
He that was sown upon the rocky places.” Verse 22
:
“
And he 
that was sown among the thorns.” Verse 23 :
*
He that was sown uponthe good ground.” 
Our Lord is interpreting the Kingdom, and His work in the Kingdom,
and He speaks of seed. He employs the masculine pronoun whichcovers all human souls. The seed then, as viewed at this point, mustbe considered in that way. There are varied responses made by thesoil, and those responses depend upon the condition of the seed thatis sown in the soil. That will become plainer as we proceed.

Take the first. “
He that was sown by the wayside.” Mark the 
emphasis. What about him ?
Birds came and devoured them. “
Anyone heareth the word of the Kingdom, and understandeth it not, thencometh the evil one, and snatcheth away that which hath been sownin his heart.” We see a personality, and something more, a person asa seed, the seed of the Kingdom, falling upon the wayside but the birdsof the air have devoured that which was sown in his heart, that whichmade him a seed of the Kingdom. To such the soil is unresponsive.
It fell by the wayside. It could not be received, and theemphasis-
strange as these things seem to merge and mix-is not upon the soilthat is an adaptation, it is upon the seed. If the seed has lost its vital 
power because the birds have devoured it, then the soil is unresponsive.

Again, “
He that was sown upon the rocky places.” When this 
man was sown, the sun is “ 
risen,” and the seed is “ 
scorched.” Who 
is he ?
Mark the emphasis, “
He that heareth the Word, andstraightway 
with joy receiveth it, yet hath he not root in himself.” He endures 
only for a little while. “
When tribulation or persecution arisethbecause of the Word, straightway he stumbleth.” Therefore he also 
is a seed of no value in the sowing of the world, and to such an one thesoil is cruel and non-productive. So the rocky places.

Take the next, “ 
He that was sown among the thorns.” Again, 
Who is he ?
He is the one who has heard the Word, but has allowedthe care of the present age, and the deceitfulness of riches to chokethe Word, and so he, as a seed, with a Kingdom value, becomes unfruitful. 
The thorns grow up and choke them. The soil in that case isdestructive. 

THE DARNEL 
Once more, “ 
He that was sown upon the good ground.” Who is 
this 1
“
He that heareth the Word, and understandeth it,” who bearsfruit, and brings forth fruit. To such the soil is good ground, is responsive, 
productive, and constructive.

In this narrative, taken as our Lord explained it, there may seemto be a difference, a disparity. Some may be inclined to say there is acontradiction between the incidence of the teaching in the story andthat of the explanation. As a matter of fact, there is no differenceor disparity. In the former, emphasis is laid upon the soil. In thelatter, the emphasis is laid upon the nature of the seed that falls uponthe soil. The seed sown, as we have seen, are men and women. But 
behind that sowing of human life in the world, with Kingdom intention,
there is another sowing, that of the Word in the heart. Turning toLuke’s account, there it is seen clearly that the sowing of the Word inthe heart of the individuals is the first thing. That being so, theseindividuals, men and women are sent out into the world, the very seedof the Kingdom. The ultimate seed is the Word itself. The world is 
the field, to which we come again ;
and the planting of that field is ofmen and women in whom the Word of God has been planted. Men and 
women fructified by the implanted Word, become seeds of the Kingdomin world affairs. 

The soil is always the same. The figures employed by our Lordsimply describe the response made to it. To men who hear the Word,
but do not understand, the soil is unreceptive. To men who hear,
and rejoice, but fail to obey, the soil is non-productive. To men who 
hear, but who respond to the age about them, the soil is destructive.
The men who hear and understand in the full sense, to such the soil

is receptive, productive, and constructive. Here in this first parablewe have an interpretation of the Lord’s own work in relation to the 
Kingdom principles. 

9. The Darnel
Matthew xiii :
24-30,
36-43 

T
T
HIS parable is necessarily closely connected with that of the Sower.
That was uttered in public, as well as this one, and the two following 
;
after which our Lord went into the house. He had given Hisexplanation of the parable of the Sower to the listening crowds. However, 
when they were alone in the house, the disciples came to Him,
and asked Him to explain the parable of the darnel. This second of 
the parables is the second and last one which the Lord Himselfexplained.

We are at once arrested by the form in which the disciples preferred 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

that request. They asked Him to explain to them “
the parable of 

the tares of the field.” That shows that as they listened, they had 

been impressed supremely by that element of the story that Jesus 

had told them. They did not ask Him to explain the parable of the 

two sowings, though that must have surprised them. Evidently the 

Lord intended to lay stress upon the fact of the darnel, or tares. Darnel 

was the word used, and the Lord had spoken of darnel being sown. 

Again there are three things to do ;
first, to take the picture as our 

Lord gave it to them simply as a picture in its Eastern setting and 

surroundings ; 
secondly, to pay attention to our Lord’s explanation ;
finally gathering up the instruction for ourselves. 

The picture is of a field in which there were two sowings. It is the 

picture also of the method of the owner of the field in face of the fact 

of the two sowings. This picture is Eastern. Notice that the field 

was the property of the man sowing good seed, and not of the enemy 

who sowed darnel. Whatever was intended by the field, we are looking 

at an Eastern picture of a field which was the property of one man. 

It was his field. 

Then there were the two sowings. The first was perfectly simple 
and natural, in the true order of things. The owner of the field sowed 
his field with harvest in view, that what he sowed should bring forth 
harvest was natural and proper. It was a picture of something going 
on year after year ;
a man owned a field, and in the field that was his, 
he cast seed, intending thereby to produce a definite kind of harvest. 
Then came the amazing part of the story that Jesus told. An enemy 
came, an enemy of the man and of the purpose of the owner of the 
field, and of his intention for the harvest upon which his mind wasset when he sowed the seed. An enemy sowed with the distinctintention of spoiling the harvest. There is no need to argue that thiswas unnatural ;
it was improper, it was dastardly. 

What was it he sowed ?
Darnel, that is, something which in its 
first springing from the ground even experts cannot detect from wheat. 
Darnel is sown, and the wheat is sown, and presently when the showers 
come, and they begin to sprout, the difference between them could not 
be detected. Darnel is like wheat, but it is actually entirely different 
from wheat. It is of a different nature. Looking like wheat when it 
first springs, as it develops and grows the difference becomes increasingly 
manifest, until when it has come to full growth, no one could make 
any mistake, or fail to distinguish between the wheat and the darnel. 
An enemy sowed the field already sown ‘with wheat, with something 
that imitated it. Evidently the enemy then was a trespasser, who 
had no right on that field at all. He was full of subtlety, and came“ 
while men slept.” He was an enemy, animated by malice. 

Then the servants of the owner came to him, and told him what 
had been going on. Evidently when the manifestation was beginning 
to be clear as to the difference, they had found out that what they 

THE DARNEL 

thought was wheat only was wheat and darnel. They came perturbed 
to the master to tell him someone had sown darnel in his wheat field. 
“An enemy has done this,” he replied. What shall we do then, 
master ?
Shall we go through this wheat field and gather out all the 
tares, this darnel? No, leave them alone until the harvest. Then 
no one will make any mistake as to the difference between them. Do 
not try to uproot the tares, because you may not be sure, and may 
uproot wheat, when you think you are gathering tares. At the consummation 
of the age, at the harvest time the whole field will be dealt 
with. Then there will be discrimination according to manifestation. 
That is the story. 

Presently, after Jesus had uttered two other brief but pregnant 
parables, they went into the house, and the disciples said to Him, 
“
Explain unto us the parable of the tares of the field. And He 
answered, and said, He that soweth the good seed is the Son of man ;
and the field is the world.” 

Take that last phrase, ” 
The field is the world.” The picture 
drawn necessitated the recognition of the fact that the field was the 
property of the one who sowed good seed. Thus inferentially our Lord 
was claiming definitely that the whole world belonged to Him, That 
is a philosophy of all life and service that we should remember. Many 
years ago now I was in the Isle of Man, and was listening to a sermon 
by a local preacher in a Wesleyan Chapel. He said something so full 
of simplicity that it fastened itself upon my memory. I have never 
lost the power of it. He said, “ 
The devil is a squatter.” That arrested 
attention. He did not leave his congregation in the dark. He knew 
something of life in America,’ and he went on and said, “
A squatteris a man who settles on land he has no right to, and works it for hisown advantage.” Can the theologians give a better definition of the 
devil than that I
That lies behind this word of Jesus, “
The field is 
the world.” It
is the property, not of the one who is sowing evil 
seeds in it, but the property of the One Who according to this aspect 
of the Kingdom, is sowing good seed in the whole world. In Mark’s 
account of the missionary commission, Jesus said, “
Go ye into all the 
cosmos, and preach the Gospel to every creature.” That is the same 
word, cosmos, the whole world, the world in itself, in its order of life, 
its peopling, “ 
all the world.” When Paul wrote his letter to the 
Romans, he said, “
The whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain 
together until now,” waiting “ 
for the revealing of the sons of God.” 
When he wrote that stupendous thing he was surely thinking of this 
parable :
the world, the field, groaning, waiting for the manifestation 
of the sons of God. Undoubtedly he was referring to the second 
Advent, and that is the ultimate fulfilment. But it is also true to-day. 
What this world everywhere in its sighing and sobbing and sorrow is 
needing is the manifestation of the sons of God. 

The inferential claim of our Lord must be recognized. He claims 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

proprietorship. “ 
The earth is the Lord’s, and the fulness thereof.” 

” 
The field is the world.” Said Jesus, Two sowings are going on. 

He had introduced this parable by saying, “
The Kingdom of heaven 

has become like . . .
We read “ 
is likened unto,” but literally it is, 

It has become Iike.
He was indicating a change that had resulted in 

world affairs as the result of His coming. Who is He ?
He is the 

Sower, and because that Sower is sowing, the Kingdom has become 

like this. The Sower is sowing His good seed in His own field. He is 

“ 
the Son of man.” 

What seed is He sowing in the midst of the world and all its affairs ?
“ 
The sons of the Kingdom.” The Kingdom is the subject from 

beginning to end, the Kingdom of God, the Kingship of God. The 

way to its realization in the midst of a derelict world, and of a blasted 

and broken race, is that He as the Sower is flinging out into the world, 

in its order and conditions, in its lack of order and chaos, seed. What 

is the seed ? The seed is the sons of the Kingdom, in His own field. 

But He said, Another sowing is going on at the same time. Who 
is the sower ?
Here our Lord used the word for Satan, diabolos, the 
traducer, the Iiar. He named him as the one who is against every 
thing that is true, and high and noble. Said Jesus, He is busy in My 
field, sowing his seed. What seed ?
“ 
Sons of the evil,” men and 
women who are devoted, not to God, but to evil ;
evil men and women 
flung into the world order. But there is a peculiar quality about 
his sowing. He is sowing his seed among the wheat, and the two 
prepositions are close together, emphasising one another, avta
meson, 
showing that the idea is of a sowing so near to something else, so 
much like it, as to create widespread deception. That is what theenemy is doing. 

What shall we do ?
If we are the sons and servants of the King 
and the Kingdom, shall we go out, and root up these evil seeds ?
Let 
them alone, said Jesus. Let both alone ;
let the wheat alone ;
let 
the darnel alone. Till when ?
Till the harvest, till the consummation, 
till that hour which must inevitably come when the true deep meaning 
of every human life comes into clear manifestation. He was lookingon to a consummation, and He said, Harvest will be the consummation 
of the age, when the difference will be patent, and when, knowing 
that hour of fuIness
has come, He will deal with the world
situation 
by supernatural agency. Angels will be introduced into national 
affairs, and there will be two harvests. The angels will gather out of 
His Kingdom everything that is harmful, everything that is wrong, 
and cast it out to the destruction of fire. They will gather out all thosewho have been truly the sons of the Kingdom, and all those that have 
resulted from their sowing in the world, and the righteous shall shineforth in the glory of the Father. 

That consummation is not yet. It is still postponed. There are 
moments when in our loyalty to our Lord, and in our impatience we 

THE DARNEL 
cry out, Lord, how long ? Can we not begin to deal with these evil 

things, and uproot them ? His voice is still saying, Let them alone. 

Let them both grow to the harvest. 

It is an old question, often talked about and debated in meetings 

and in conversations, Is the world getting better, or is it getting worse ?
There is only one answer, if this parable is true. The world is getting 

better every day, and worse every day. There are two sowings, two 

growths, two increasing manifestations. Evil to-day is more deadly, 

more damnable, more dastardly than it has ever been in the history of 

the world. Good to-day is more pronounced, more definite. There 

are more signs everywhere of it than there have ever been. Both are 

growing, growing, growing, and presently the harvest will come. We 

do not know when. 

Mark what this parable teaches quite clearly. The method of the 
foe in this age is principally that of imitation. Those who are definitely 
hostile, and blatantly declare so, are not in view in this parable. I am 
not saying the devil has nothing to do with them, but that is not hismethod. It is not his most subtle method. It is not the method most 
productive of harm in the world. It is imitation. Go back to Acts. 
Ananias and Sapphira were both members of the outward and visible 
Church. Simon Magus
was also active in the work of the Church. See 
the writings, and the same thing is evident. What the apostle combated 
was not the harm of definite opposition, or the massed opposition of 
godlessness in the pagan world, but that principle, so much like 
Christianity, darnel, which at the beginning looked like wheat. That 
has gone on all down the ages. The elements of imitation have been 
found, so that the Church came to rejoice in a false power, which was 
entirely antagonistic to her very genius and life, and even to indulge 
in a false form of supposed purity, which consisted in abstention from 
trivial things, while the weightier matters were neglected in the depth 
of her life. 

To-day we are seeing it in the realm of doctrine, accommodation, 
to supposed modern thought, in which some men are using the phrasing 
of Christianity, devitalized, and devoid of the fundamental things-
imitation. That is the supreme peril to-day ;
it is doctrinal. 

What are we to do about it ?
Nothing. Let it alone, resting 
assured that the hour of actual manifestation is coming. If we begin 
trying to root up the darnel we are in danger of rooting up wheat, and 
the process of development can do no harm to the good, and the 
process of development means always moving towards final judgmentfor the evil. 

Here for the first time our Lord pointed to the consummation of 
the age. “
The Kingdom of heaven has become like .
.
.
The field 
in which the Son of man is sowing the seed will come to harvest, the 
full realisation of the Kingdom of God. The enemy is sowing darnel, 
imitation ;
the purpose of which is the hindering of the arrival of the 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

Kingdom of God. But there is a consummation, an hour of harvest, 

and then the dawning of a new age, when all things that offend shall 

be cast out, and then the shining of the righteous in the Kingdom of 

the Son. 

No parable must ever be carried beyond the intention of our Lord. 

In this consideration we may well remind ourselves that there are 

things implicit here, but not explicit. There are other things to be 

said about the age than was said in this parable. A man who is a 

son of evil, and is planted in this field of the world, darnel, can do 

what no darnel can do in the realm of Nature. He can have his nature 

changed and become a son of the Kingdom. That is where the Gospel 

comes in. The Gospel is implicit here, and it is well to remember it. 

A man who but yesterday, planted by Satan in the midst of commerce, 

of society, or recreation, exerting an evil influence, and hindering the 

Kingdom of God ;
blessed be God, can be changed, and become a son 

of the Kingdom, and begin to exert the influence with others, towards 

the coming of the Kingdom of God. 

Our business then is to grow, to develop, and so to fulfil
the purpose 

of our Lord in our own lives, and thus to hasten the coming of His 

Kingdom ;
and never to attempt to pull up darnel. 

IO. The Mustard Seed 

Matthew xiii: 31, 32 

T
T
HIS is the first of the octave of parables contained in this thirteenth 

chapter of Matthew, of which the Lord gave no explanation. 

The explanation of the Sower was given in public. That of the sowing 

of the darnel, was given in private to His disciples. 

When approaching such a parable, there are two perils to be 
avoided, in interpretation. One is that of popularity, and the other is 
that of misinterpretation of history, in an attempt to understand the 
parable. We have no right to come to this, or any parable, influenced 
by the general consensus of expository opinion. Here I would lay 
down a principle for all Bible study. Whatever the popular interpretation 
may be, it is not therefore necessarily the correct one. It may 
be correct, but popularity is not any guarantee of accuracy. That 
needs no arguing. The acceptation of popular interpretation of 
Scripture led to the crucifixion of Jesus. 

Then there is a danger of considering history from the standpoint 
of observation, and interpreting these parables of Jesus by the facts 
of history as we know them. That too may be a perilous procedure 
against which we need to guard. 

There are general principles of interpretation which must he 

THE MUSTARD SEED 
observed. The first is that of the harmony of the teaching of Jesus

throughout these parables. Referring now only to those parables

contained in this thirteenth chapter of Matthew, we must bear in

mind that there is perfect harmony in the general conception and

teaching of Jesus throughout.

In the second place, we must bear in mind the consistency of our

Lord’s figures of speech. He never used one in two different senses. 

They are all used consistently in the same way.

To apply these canons of interpretation, the popular conception of

this particular parable is that our Lord predicted the great success of

the Kingdom. Almost invariably the parable of the mustard seed that

became a tree is treated as though our Lord was showing the complete

and ultimate success of the Kingdom in this age. We must not forget

that all these parables have to do with one age.

That view, however, has been distinctly disproved by history.
There has been growth, but it has been unsatisfactory. We talk to-dayof the Kingdom of God, and of Christian nations. There are no 
Christian nations. There are nations that profess to be founded uponChristian principles, but there are no Christian nations. We are not a 
Christian nation. The principles of a Christian nation have never yetbeen put to the test, and proven, and revealed to the world in nationallife. There has been a growth in Kingdom understanding, and theapplication of Kingdom principles, but nothing approaching complete 
success. On the contrary, there is very much that denies success.

Another principle to be observed is that of the harmony of teaching.
Throughout all these parables these things of difficulty, limitation,
opposition, and admixture were evidently foretold by our Lord.
There is not one parable that moves to a consummation of the ageresulting from the activities in the age. The idea that the Gospel isto be preached until all the world is converted, is a mistaken one, if webelieve in Jesus, and in what He said. There is nothing that suggestssuch a result in any of these parables.

To take the figures recurring in all those parables at which wehave been looking :
the sowing of the seed, and the seed, the Word ofGod incarnate in human lives, the sons of the Kingdom. The Sower 
Who sowed the seed is the Son of man. The soil, the field in whichthe seed is sown, is the world. The birds are symbolic of evil, thatcome and snatch away the seed. These figures are consistent.

Let us then look at this parable with unprejudiced and open mind.
So we will examine the picture, and apply the teaching.

The picture Jesus drew was of a seed, the smallest of all seeds,
which seed grew until it became a tree. Normally the mustard seednever becomes a tree. The mustard is a herb, not a tree. As a tree it 
has been described as “
a garden shrub outdoing itself.” That isabnormality. All attempts to make the tree square with popularinterpretation is of the nature of special pleading. I have referred to 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

Dr. Thomson’s Land and the Book, invaluable to every Bible student. 

But even Dr. Thomson evades this, or tries to account for it. Writing 

from Palestine, and from his own observation, he plainly says that the 

mustard there was not a tree, and did not grow to a tree. He then 

says possibly in our Lord’s time there was another variety of mustard 

that grew to be a tree. I have quoted the spirit of what he says. 

Others have tried in other ways to account for it. Dr. Carr,
in the 

Cambridge Bible has this sentence :
“
The mustard plant does not 

grow to a very great height, so that Luke’s expression, ‘
waxed a great 

tree ’ 
must not be pressed.” 

To deal with the Scriptures in that way is to get nowhere. Our 

Lord said “
A great tree ”
;
and He also said that this particular 

mustard seed grew greater than all the herbs, of which it is one. Dr. 

Royle, another writer, suggests that the reference was to Khardal, 

or Salvadora Persica.
But Dr. Morrison has declared there is no proof 

of the growth of either of these specimens in that neighbourhood. Our 

Lord was surely teaching that in this age there would be an abnormal 

and unnatural growth of the mustard seed, so that it would afford 

as a tree, a lodging for the birds of the air. The word means a camping 

in it, and living in it. The parable was never intended to teach the 

progress and growth of the Kingdom to finality in this age. It does 

mark development, but it is abnormal development. 

To turn from the picture that Jesus drew to mark the unnatural 
development of the Christian principle and ideal, as taught by Him. 
What is its natural development ?
Lowliness, meekness, service. 
These are the things that mark the true Christian spirit, emanating 
from those in whom the Word of God is incarnate, and who are flung 
out into the age as the seed of the Kingdom. The marks of true 
Christianity are always those of likeness to Him Who said, ”
I am 
meek and lowly in heart ”
;
likeness to Him Who said, ‘
The Son of 
man came not to be ministered unto but to minister, and to give His 
life a ransom for many.” 

What are the unnatural notes ?
Exactly the opposite of the 
natural ;
loftiness, pride, dominance. Wherever in the history ofChristianity these things have manifested themselves, loftiness, pride, 
seeking for dominion and mastery, they have proved not a normal 
development, but an abnormal and false one. 

Some years ago in the Isle of Man I had a conversation with Sir 
Hall Caine. He had just issued his novel, The Christian, with John 
Storm as his hero. It had troubled me, and I said to him, ”
Do you 
mean to suggest that John Storm is the normal type of Christianity ?
”
Quickly and sharply he answered me, “
By no means. I am only 
suggesting that John Storm is what Christian people were, or aimed to 
be ; 
and that it is not Christian.” Then he said this remarkable 
thing, which I am not defending or attacking. “
I can put the whole 
of the works and ethic of Jesus into two brief quotations.” I said, 

THE MUSTARD SEED 

“
What are they ?
”
He replied, ”
’
He that is greatest in the Kingdom 
of heaven, let him be servant of all,’ ”
“
And what is the other ?
”
“
‘
Lay not up for yourselves treasures on earth where moth and rust 
corrupt.’ Now,” he said, “
test England by those, test the common 
life of the Christian Church by this, and you will see how little practical 
vital Christianity is understood.” 

I have quoted that conversation, and leave it, but take a look down 
history. Yes, the Church has grown in loftiness. It has often become 
so powerful that it has become proud, and has sought dominion over 
others. All these things are the outcome not of normal, but of abnormal 
growth. As we look down the history of the age, so far we shall see the 
truth illustrated. It began when those first disciples when Jesus was 
with them, said, “
Who is greatest in the Kingdom of heaven ?
”
There 
was the passion for prominence, position, and power. We know how 
He answered that. He told them that only those who were prepared 
to drink His cup, and be baptized with His baptism were great in the 
Kingdom of heaven. The early Church had illustrations of it. Peter, 
in his letter, charged them not to lord it over God’s heritage. 

The supreme illustration of this abnormal growth was in the 
espousal of Christianity by Constantine, the Roman emperor. That 
was the darkest day that dawned in all the history of the Church. 
His espousal of Christianity was an astute and clever political move, 
and he grafted upon Christianity much of paganism, and elevated it 
to a position of wordly power ;
and in that hour the whole Church 
passed under the blight from which it has never completely escaped. 
That is the whole sin and wrong of the Papacy, domination won in 
the name of Christ, the claiming of power to rule over kings, emperors, 
and rulers and dictate terms to them ;
a great tree, spreading its 
branches. That spirit remains in every attempt even to-day, to realize 
the Divine purpose by high organization, vested power. It is not a 
good thing. It is an abnormal growth. 

It has gone on, and is still going on. Christ said it would, and the 
unintended issue has been the false greatness of external position and 
power, a great tree. The tree is always the symbol of greatness and 
authority. Nebuchadnezzar was likened to a tree. Pharaoh with all 
his power was likened to a tree ;
and the Kingdom of heaven has 
become like that, a great worldly power, principality occupied with its 
loftiness, the expressing of itself in pride, seeking dominion, or domination 
in the affairs of the world ;
and consequently it has become the 
refuge of unclean things. Such the parable, and its teaching. 

Again we must remember that in these parables our Lord was 
not dealing with the true nature of the Kingdom. “
The Kingdom of 
heaven is like .
.
.
He spoke, even in these parables, in the abiding 
terms, and the abiding tense. He was surveying the age, and He looked 
on twice to the end of the age, its consummation. It was the age 
initiated by His first advent, and which is bounded and will be con
4 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

summated
by His second advent. Not in one of these parables was He 

revealing the inward nature of the Kingdom, except at the beginning, 

when He showed that the Kingdom principles are found in the Word 

of God, as it is embodied in the lives of Christian men and women. 

That, of course, includes everything, but there is no detailed reference 

to it in interpretation. The ethics of the Kingdom are not found here 

in detail. They are found in the Sermon on the Mount. 

This is of great importance, for our Lord was not revealing the 
nature of the ultimate issue. Twice He referred to that issue in this 
chapter clearly and distinctly ;
but there is no detailed description. 
He was depicting Kingdom processes during one age of Divine procedure. 
This is not the only age. It will come to consummation ;
but 
the work of God will not end with its consummation. There are other 
methods of God predicted in the Word of God, following the ending 
of this age are other ages, the Kingdom of the Son, and beyond that 
the hour when Paul says, “
Then cometh
the end, when He shall deliver 
up the Kingdom to God .
.. that God may be all and in all.” What 
lies beyond that who shall tell ?
Paul wrote of the great procession of 
the ages in those descriptive words of infinite poetry, “
the generation 
of the age of the ages.” God is not exhausted in this age. He has 
others to come, the details of which are not revealed, but the fact is 
declared. 

Christ was in no doubt about the happenings of this age. There 
should be the sowing of the seed, its scattering far and wide. 

“
Sow in the morn thy seed,
At eve hold not thy hand.” 

Said Christ, That seed will be sown by the Sower, but only a portion 
will be fruitful. There will be the scattering of seed that bears no 
fruit. He suffered no delusion. He did not say that the seed being 
planted, a complete and perfect harvest would result. He saw an 
enemy scattering amid the seed, damel. He saw that the age must 
run on with the development of wheat and darnel, until the consummation 
of the age. So here He saw the growth, out of life, but 
abnormal. A herb becomes a great tree, and the fowls of the air 
lodge in its branches.

What is the bearing of this parable on us ? It calls us to a recognition 
of the facts of the age in which we live. That will save us from 
the delusion that so often fills the minds of honest souls with despair.
We thought it would have been so different, that the Kingdom principles 
were winning. We thought that was so, with a certain measure of 
arrogance, at the close of the nineteenth century and on into the 
twentieth. Then like the crack of doom we found the Kingdom ideal 
rejected by the philosophers of earth, and the earth bathed in blood, 
and muck, and war. With reverence again I say, Christ had no such 
delusions. 

THE LEAVENED MEAL 

Finally if this parable corrects our thinking about this age, and 
tells us of its true nature, it should have its effect on our individual 
lives, and on our Church life to-day. We should see to it that there 
is nothing in our lives contrary to the genius and spirit of our Lord 
and Master, and of the Kingdom of God ;
no loftiness or pride, or 
seeking for mastery, all contrary to the genius of the Kingdom of God 
and of the Spirit of Jesus Christ. These false things create a false 
greatness which He disowns. So surely as that false greatness is there, 
the unclean birds come in, and lodge in the Church, and in our lives ;
and the Kingdom is thwarted and hindered. We are not to help in 
the development of a great tree out of a mustard seed, which is the 
least of all seeds. We are called upon to have faith as that smallest 
of seeds, as Jesus elsewhere said. If we have that, then by the power 
of that faith, which is life, we can help to remove the mountains, and 
to fling up a highway for the coming of the King into His own Kingdom. 

I I. The Leavened Meal 
Matthew
xiii:
33
HIS is a much disputed parable. Again we have no explanation of

Tit given by the Lord Himself. However, in this case, especially to 

those who first heard it, there was no need of explanation, listening as 

they did from the Hebrew standpoint, and with their knowledge of the 

Hebrew writings, and of the symbolism of Hebrew figures of speech. 

They understood; undoubtedly, what was intended. 

Why then has this become a disputed parable as to its true teach
ing ? While not insisting upon it, I think it has been through medieval 

misinterpretation of it, in which the interpreters attempted to square 

the parable with what they thought was the fact concerning the enter
prise in the world of the Kingdom of God. 

There are two interpretations. The first is that the leaven alone 
is a type of the Kingdom. When our Lord said, “
The Kingdom ofheaven is like unto Ieaven,
some stop there in their thinking. If that 
is done, then we are almost driven to the conclusion that the figure 
of leaven was used as the type of something good, and therefore that 
the idea of the parable is that the Kingdom will be completely victorious 
in this age. That is the view which is almost universally accepted as 
the interpretation of the parable. 

The other interpretation is that not the leaven alone illustrates the 
Kingdom, but that the whole picture is required, that of leaven hidden 
by a woman in three measures of meal. If that be the true interpretation, 
then leaven is the type of evil ;
a principle which, in the working, 
harms the Kingdom rather than helps it in this age. Those are the 
two views, 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

Although the first is popular, we should guard ourselves against 

accepting the popular interpretation as being correct. I am deliberately 

convinced that the latter is the true interpretation ;
first, because the 

former one contradicts the whole symbolic use of leaven in the Bible. 

If in this case leaven stands for good, it is the only case in the Bible 

which any expositor claims that it does so. Again, the former interpre
tation contradicts the teaching of all the other parables sofar
considered, 

in every one of which Jesus, referring to the process of the age, always 

marked limitation. No parable shows all the facts. Our Lord was 

illustrating the working of the Kingdom principle in the age which is 

to be consummated by His own advent, as He Himself did show. 

Seeing that all the other parables speak of mixture, if this of the 

leaven is taken as being good, the whole leavened, then there is no 

mixture at all. This would then contradict the teaching of all the other 

parables. 

Again, I reject the earlier view, because it is disproved by the 

history of the centuries ;
and finally because the method is not in 

harmony with the method of the other parables. In every parable of

Jesus the whole picture is needed to understand His teaching. 

If we read this parable, “
The Kingdom of heaven is like unto 
leaven,” and stay there, we are violating a principle. Jesus did not 
stop there. He said, “
The Kingdom of heaven is like unto leaven, 
which a woman took, and hid in three measures of meal, till it was all 
leavened.” It is not so that the Kingdom of heaven is like leaven. 
It is not the leaven alone that is the illustration of the Kingdom of 
heaven. 

Having then cleared the ground a little, let us turn to an examination 
of the parable, taking our usual method of looking at the picture 
suggested, and then deducing the teaching. 

As we look at the picture, we must carefully examine the symbolism.
There is the essential fact of the picture, and the facts which affect 
the central fact. What is the central fact ?
Leaven ?
No, three 
measures of meal. What are the facts affecting it ? Two, a woman, 
and leaven. 

” 
Three measures of meal.” When Jesus said that, He was not 
using occasional language, but employing a phrase that had a definite 
meaning and value to those who heard it. It is often very valuable to 
find where the phrase first occurs in the Bible, and then to trace it 
through. To do that in the case of these words, we shall find it used 
in Genesis, before the time of Moses, before the law was given. I t 
occurs in the eighteenth chapter of Genesis, in a wonderful picture. 
It was used of the home, which was a tent erected under the oaks at 
Mamre. Abraham lived there. He had left Ur of Chaldea, and had 
pitched his tent under the oak trees, or the terebinths as it should be 
rendered. He was living there. One day there came visitors to him, 
all of them evidently supernatural. He recognized One of them as 

THE LEAVENED MEAL 

supreme, and the other two subservient. I imagine Abraham did not 

know at the beginning Who this supreme Visitor was. He recognized 

that He was a supernatural Visitor, and immediately they prepared 

and offered hospitality. In that connection we are told that Sarah 

prepared “ 
three measures of meal.” What was it ? It was a meal of 

fellowship, of hospitality ;
a meal in which the supernatural Visitor, 

Whom Abraham soon found to be God Himself, having angelic form, 

and human language to communicate with him was to take part ;
and 

Abraham spread a meal for Him, “ 
three measures of meal.” So the 

phrase went back to that early time, indicating the preparation of a 

meal. 

Come now to the time of Moses, and see the instructions for the 

meal offering, one of the offerings of a religious rite. Then later, 

Gideon, on a memorable occasion, brought to God three measures of 

meal. Hannah, when worshipping, brought as an offering, three 

measures of meal. Pass on into the prophetic literature, and Ezekiel 

at one time, when describing the hour of ritual and worship, used the 

phrase seven times over to mark a certain fact, “
three measures of 

meal.” 

Coming back for a moment to the ritual of these Hebrew people, 
the phrase became well known, “
three tenths parts of an ephah,
which is the same thing as “ 
three measures of meal,” in the meal 
offering. In the ritual of the Hebrew people, the meal offering followed 
the burnt offering. The burnt offering was symbolic of the dedication 
of the lives of these people to God. The meal offering following, always 
symbolized the dedication of the service of the people, whose lives were 
dedicated to God. The meal offering was first the result of cultivation, 
and then manufacture ;
of careful preparation, and so of their service. 
Always three measures of meal. So that which we first see in the home 
yet had upon it that great eternal fact of man’s communion with God. 
As Abraham talked with Jehovah, as Jehovah was represented in the 
angel Presence, that which commenced there we see was embodied 
in the sacred ritual of the Hebrew people, as an offering marking 
dedication to God, also marking fellowship with God. 

Remembering the institution of the meal offering, every worshipper 
retained part, while part was devoted to God. Consequently in that 
division of the three measures of meal there was indicated the hospitality 
of the soul to God, and the hospitality of God to the soul. Therefore 
this phrase that we may read so easily and never really understand, 
these men as they listened to Jesus, understood that figure in their 
literature as an interpretation of life. When our Lord spoke of three 
measures of meal, inevitably their minds would go to the meal offering. 
The essential thing here is that the Kingdom of heaven is like unto 
leaven which a woman took and hid in three measures of meal, until 
the whole was leavened. 

Two things are here in the picture of Jesus, first, fellowship with 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

God, hospitality between the soul and God ;
and offering and dedica
tion to God. Go on to the apocalyptic literature, and in those wonderful 

letters written to the seven Churches, the Head of the Church is 

standing outside the door of the last of the Churches. He had knocked, 

seeking admission, and He says, ‘
If any man hear My voice, and open 

the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with 

Me.” I will come in, and be his Guest and at the same time he shall 

be My guest. That is perfect fellowship. In the symbolism of the 

Hebrew people all that lies behind the meal offering. 

Jesus said, “
The Kingdom of heaven is like unto leaven, which 
a woman took, and hid in three measures of meal, till it was all 
leavened.” A woman, and leaven. The woman represented authority 
and management in the hospitality of a home. Sarah was doing that 
work on that first occasion, when Abraham held communion with 
Jehovah about His Kingship over Sodom ;
and Sarah had her part 
in that communion. Without criticizing her, she broke down, for she 
laughed at certain things that were said. Oh, it is better to laugh at 
God than never to taIk
to Him ;
and He will be patient with us, if in 
our blindness we laugh. I think I have often done it in utter foolishness. 
Here then a woman represented that communion and that 
authority. We speak of the Church as a mother. The great Roman 
system ever speaks of Mother Church. I am not objecting to it. 
Authority within the realm of hospitality and fellowship is provided in 
the figure of a woman. 

What did the woman do ?
She hid leaven in the three measures 
of meal. Now leaven is always symbolic of that which disintegrates, 
breaks up, corrupts. There was no leaven in Sarah’s bread when she 
prepared three measures of meal. Leaven was strictly forbidden in 
the meal offering. It was to be excluded therefrom. To turn from 
those ancient suggestions and symbols to the New Testament, Paul, 
writing to a Corinthian Church that had become leavened indeed, in 
that bad sense of the word, and had lost its power of witness because 
it had been harbouring those corrupting, said this : 

”
Know ye not that a little Ieaven leaveneth the whole lump ?
Purgeout the old leaven, that ye may be a new lump, even as ye are unleavened.
For our passover
also hath been sacrificed, even Christ ;
wherefore let us 
keep the feast, not with old leaven, neither with the leaven of malice andwickedness, but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth.” 

Or again, in the Galatian letter, he said the same thing in anotherconnection. “ 
A little leaveneth the whole lump.” Leaven is alwaysdisintegrating. To interpret the
parable of Jesus by the common 
practices of the day, yeast, however used, is a disintegrating force,
and in the end it always separates and destroys. That is of its very 
essence and nature. Leaven always disintegrates. 

Jesus said, “
The Kingdom of heaven is like unto leaven, which a 

THE LEAVENED MEAL 

woman took, and hid in three measures of meal, till it was all leavened.” 

The Kingdom of heaven is likened to that which happens when some
thing is introduced which makes fellowship on the highest level 

impossible, because it has a corrupting influence :
leaven swells, and 

puffs up. The Bible is a wonderful literature. So many things that 

seem to be miles apart belong to each other. What was it that stilled 

the complaint of the soul of the prophet Habakkuk, and made him 

sing his great song at last, after all his trouble ?
The announcement 

by God of a principle of life. Speaking of Cyrus the enemy, and the 

proud oncoming armies that God was using, under His control, He 

said, “ 
Behold, his soul is puffed up,” that is, swollen ;
”
it is not 

upright in him but the just shah live by his faith.” Take that picture 

of evil, of pride and crookedness, acting like leaven, until men of a 

nation become puffed up, swollen. Jesus said that would happen to 

the working of His Kingdom in this age, that there should be the 

hiding of leaven in the three measures of meal, until the whole was 

leavened. 

Turning from that attempt to understand the figures of speech, 
and to gather up its teaching, take the three measures of meal, representing 
the feast of hospitality and fellowship between God and men. 
If the Kingdom testimony in the world is to be powerful, it must be 
based upon the fellowship of the people of God with Him in incorruptness. 
That needs no argument. We all agree to it. The measure in 
which our fellowship with God fails to be maintained in incorruptness, 
freedom from disintegrating forces that destroy it, is the measure 
in which we fail to bear a Kingdom testimony, or are of value in theworld. 

Go back once more to Abraham and Lot. Look at the difference 
between them. Lot was a good man. The New Testament tells us 
that he was “ 
a righteous man.” But he first pitched his tent towards 
Sodom. Then he went to live in Sodo
Finally he became so 
identified with Sodom that he lost all his influence. When the crisis 
came there were not five men in the city whom he had influenced 
towards righteousness and God. Abraham stood under the terebinths 
in fellowship with God, and he was able to exert that influence that 
nearly saved Sodom. So come on down the ages, and see the influence 
working for the incoming of the Kingdom of God. 

We learn then that testimony to the Kingdom is weakened in the 
measure in which the Church in her management has ever permitted 
the intrusion of the things which disintegrate, and so mar her testimony 
to the Kingdom of God. Listen to the Lord Himself upon otheroccasions. “
Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees.,,
Or as Mark records it, “
Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and 
Herod.
Or as Luke has it, “
Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees 
which is hypocrisy.” Pass on to Paul, and remember the context in 
Corinthians. He was dealing with the fact that the Church was tolerat
PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

ing within her own borders an incestuous person, guilty of immorality. 

The Church was unable to deal with that person. Purge yourself 

from the leaven, said Paul. Or in the word quoted from Galatians, 

the context shows that Judaizing teachers were attempting to graft 

on to the Christian movement a ritual that had no force and value ;
and so were placing a burden upon believers that they never ought to 

bear, the leaven of legalism within the Church. Take that little group 

of Scriptures, and read them, and think the matter out. 

What is the leaven intermixed, which has weakened the testimony 

of the Church to the Kingdom of God ? The leaven of hypocrisy, the 

leaven of rationalism, that showed in the Sadducean questioning of the 

supernatural, for they did not believe in angel, spirit, or resurrection. 

The leaven of materialism was embodied in Herod,
who sought for 

power and greatness upon+the basis of material things ;
“
the leaven 

of Herod.
The leaven of the toleration of evil, the failure to exercise 

a high discipline to keep the Church clean and pure ;
and the terrible 

leaven of mere formalism, content with rite and ceremonial, devoid of 

power. Jesus said, The whole will be leavened. It does not mean 

that the whole will become leaven, but the influence of leaven hidden 

in the measures of meal, that illustrate fellowship, will permeate the 

whole movement. 

Here then in the four first parables of Jesus, He saw the Kingdom 
influence in the age. First, the seed, the fact of the giving of opportunity. 
Secondly, the good seed planted in the world’s field, similar in 
intention to the first. Thirdly, the mustard seed that grew abnormally 
until it became a great tree. Finally the meal into which is introduced 
the principle of disintegration, breaking in upon the fellowship of manwith God. Take these four and notice how in every case He marked 
the fact of comparative failure in the age, the failure of the seed, only 
one quarter of it fruitful, three parts of it scattered, and not fruitful 
at all. Side by side with the work of the Son of man sowing in His 
field, the world, with His wheat, He saw an enemy sowing the imitation, 
the darnel. False development into a great tree, magnificent in 
appearance, a lodging place for the fowls of the air. Then the degeneration 
in power, breaking in upon fellowship, and so marring the witness 
of men and women to the Kingdom of God. 

To use a phrase employed in our previous study. Whatever we 
may think of the process of affairs in this age, Christ was under no 
delusion. He looked on, and saw exactly what has happened. Everything 
has happened, and is happening according to His teaching. There 
are other aspects which succeeding parables will unfold. Those to 
which we come next were spoken to the disciples alone. To cover the 
whole ground of the two groups of four, the first four were spoken to 
men of sight, to the disciples and to the crowd; the second four 
were spoken to men of faith, and were spoken to the disciples 
only. 

THE TREASURE HIDDEN 

57 

I
2.
The Treasure Hidden 

Matthew xiii, 44
T
T
HE PARABLE contained in this verse is the first of those spoken to 

the disciples alone. In verse thirty-six we read, “
Then He left 

the multitudes, and went into the house.” Then the disciples asked 

Him to explain the parable of the darnel. He did so, and then uttered 

four more parables to them privately 

These four also deal with the Kingdom in this age. Our Lord was 
surveying an age which began with His own coming and ministry, 
and will conclude, as He taught in two of the parables, with the consummation 
of the age. These parables then have to do with this age 
in which we are living. In the economy of God other ages stretch out 
beyond. 

It should be borne in mind that the viewpoint is changed in the 
four parables now to be considered. Having spoken to men of sight, 
Jesus now spoke to men of faith. That necessarily creates a difference 
in outlook. He had spoken to men of sight, and therefore had dwelt 
upon aspects of the Kingdom which would be patent to such and 
self-evident as the age unfolded. He had foreshadowed that there 
would be the sowing of seed, with different results, dependent upon 
the quality of the seed. In the next He had shown how during this 
age, side by side with the sowing of the good seed, there would be the 
work of an enemy sowing darnel, imitations of the good seed. He had 
shown then how during this period there would be unnatural development 
of a mustard seed to a great tree. Finally He had shown how 
during the age there would be a process of degeneration in the Kingdom 
under the figure of the leavened meal. Look back over the age from 
the word of our Lord while here until this time, and it will be seen how 
all the things that He foretold have been manifest. The seed has been 
sown with differing results. The enemy has been sowing the damel, 
perplexing even the elect. The Church has been cursed by organizations 
that have been harboured in her very life, and there has been 
a breaking down of her testimony, making her fellowship ineffective, 
and her testimony to men equally ineffective. 

Now the Lord spoke to His disciples, to those men of faith who 
already believed in Him, who would go out to live on the principle of 
faith, even though everything appeared to be against them, He now 
gave them four parables, and these have to do with the age, revealing 
the Divine thought and method, and purpose in it. These are not 
patent to sight. They constitute the secrets of God, but they are 
revealed to men of faith, knowing which, and understanding which, 
they will be strengthened and heartened and equipped for all their 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

service. That is the character of the four parables to which we now 

come, the first of which we survey in this chapter. 

To summarize briefly on the four. In the first He showed the pur
pose of God for the whole worId,
“ 
He buyeth the field.” In the second, 

in many ways the most wonderful of them all, He showed the relation 

to other ages and other spheres of what is now being done, as the 

pearl is being purchased. The third declared the method of the age 

in the economy of God, a great drag-net flung out into the sea, enclosing 

all manner of fish. The last showed the responsibility of those who 

are His scribes in the new Kingdom. 

Turn now to the first. We follow our custom of attempting to 
see the picture, and then deduce the teaching.

There are parts of this picture with which we are familiar. Our 
Lord had already used two figures in the earlier parables, which He 
explained. So there is no difficmty
about them. First, “ 
the field,” 
“ 
The Kingdom of heaven is like unto treasure hidden in the field.” 
We have seen that “ 
the field is the world.” 

Then, again, a man buys the field. We have seen that the man 
is the Son of man, so named in the earlier parables. Here then is 
a picture of the world, and the relation of Christ to it. Those two 
facts of the general picture are quite clear, because of previous 
explanation. 

Then two new ideas are introduced here ;
treasure, and purchase at 
cost. The man is seen discovering treasure in the field, as selling all 
that he had in order to buy that field, and secure that treasure. The 
treasure is there, but it is hidden. Someone finds it, knows it is there, 
and realizes it. Others do not know it is there. Then in order to 
possess that treasure this man sells everything that he has to buy 
that field. 

That brief statement of what the picture presents will enable us 
to begin our study, as it-relieves us from speculation on two points, 
the field, and the Man ;
and leaves us free to discuss the two new 
figures in relation to the other two. 

What is the relation of this treasure to the whole world ?
“
The 
field is the world.” He sees that treasure in that field, He has discovered 
it. What was the treasure that He saw, as He looked out upon theworld ?
Unquestionably it was the Kingdom of God hidden in the 
world, the Divine government, in its principles, its order, and its 
exceeding beauty. It is a remarkable thing that we are told that this 
was hidden in the field. He saw the world as made for the display of 
the glory of God. He saw the vicegerent of the world in rebellion 
against God, and therefore unable to realize the possibilities of the 
cosmos. He saw the whole territory waste and void, as the result of 
misgovernment ;
but the potentialities were there, and He saw in the 
world what has well been described as ” 
imprisoned splendour.” 

I am using the word “
world ”
in the fullest sense, as when our Lord 

THE TREASURE HIDDEN 

used it, according to Mark and said we were to go out into all the 

cosmos, the whole order of the material, mental, and spiritual ;
the 

cosmic order which had been broken in upon and destroyed. But our 

Lord saw the possibilities of this world ;
and His work in life was 

that of exhibiting those hidden splendours and glories in strange and 

unexpected ways, and declaring all the time the glory of the Kingdom 

of God. How the glory of the world is constantly revealed to us. 

Flowers ?
Yes, He said God clothed them. Birds ?
Yes, God takes 

care of them, and feeds them, and is with them when they die. Chil
dren ?
Their angels do always behold the face of the Father. Men I
The highest thing man can do is to seek the Kingdon
of God. “
Im
prisoned splendour,” He saw it everywhere. He looked and saw the 

treasure hidden in a ruined world. 

What did He do ? He purchased it, and when He purchased it, 
He hid it. That is the point of mystery, the point at which we must 
halt. We wonder what it means. It was hidden. He brought it into 
visibility, and hid it. In the world order we have a revelation of the 
ultimate, the Kingdom ministry of Jesus while here in the world ;
not the ultimate limit of it, but the ultimate of it during His own 
mission. He came to discover and to reveal it. The eyes that could see 
this splendour that was imprisoned, He made it flash and flame forth. 
There were those who saw, and gathered round about it. But it was 
rejected, and He rejected the nation that had been the depository of 
the Kingdom of God in the solemn words recorded by Matthew, “
The 
Kingdom of God shall be taken away from you, and shall be given to a 
nation bringing forth the fruits thereof.” He postponed the full manifestation 
to a future age when the Son of man should come in Hisglory, and the holy angels with Him. 

He then turned His face to a larger work, apart from which the 
splendours hidden could never come to full and final realization. All 
that is expressed in that simple sentence, “
He sold all that He hath, 
and buyeth that field.” Everything is there. It is a complete revelation 
of the ultimate in the work of Jesus in the world, and for the 
world. Notice how it begins. “
In His joy, He goeth and selleth all 
that He hath.” We interpret that as imprisoned splendour, hidden 
glories that are not manifest. He revealed them in measure, and yet 
they were not seen by the vast masses. They were hidden, and yet 
in His joy He was going to do something that should make possible 
the realization of the ultimate meaning of that great cosmic order inthe Kingdom of God. “ 
In His joy.” 

Tarry there for a moment. What He did we will also look at, 
What was the joy of Jesus ?
In the great prophetic word uttered concerning 
Him long before He came, and perfectly fulfilled in all the 
story of His life, it was written :
“
.
.
in the volume of the book it is written of Me ;
I delight to do Thy will, 0 My God.” 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

“ 
I delight.” The joy of His heart was the will of God. He knew its 
goodness. He knew its acceptability. He knew its perfection. He 
knew that within that will of God the wilderness would blossom as 
the rose, and the desert become as pools of glorious, fertilizing water. 
He knew, and the joy that filled Him was the contemplation of the 
realization of the will of God in the world. That was the joy that was 
set before Him. To quote once more from the Hebrew letter, “
Who 
for the joy that was set before Him, endured the Cross, despising the 
shame.” What was the joy set before Him ?
God forgive us, we have 
often been so narrow in interpreting it. Was it the joy of going back 
to God, and to love and rest and peace with God that filled Him ?
The 
joy was the joy of the certainty that at last, as Browning has it, 

“
Though a wide compass round be fetched;
That what began best, can’t end worst, 
Nor what God blessed once, prove accurst.” 

The joy of the Lord was His strength. The joy of the Lord was the 
delight of His will. The joy of the Lord was the secret power that 
enabled Him to endure the Cross. 

In the parable He has told us what He did. “
He selleth all that 
He hath.” Where shall we find an adequate commentary on that ?
“ 
He emptied Himself,” sold all that He had. Silence is the best commentary 
possible in pondering that. Fill the gap with thinking ;
“
all 
that He bath.
And mark, that was His estimate of the worth of the 
treasure that He saw hidden in the field of the world. That includes 
everything in the cosmos, everything in the earthly order, all life asit is, and as it passes, and as it will be ;
but supremely man, and the 
infinite and glorious possibilities of humanity, in which He saw this 
imprisoned splendour.
His estimate of its worth, who shall put on it 
a measure ?
Think of all that He had, and all that “ 
He selleth.” What 
for ?
To buy the field, the world, the whole creation. He redeemed 
it that it might be held waiting for the time of perfect realization of His 
ultimate purpose, and that it might be claimed ultimately, and filled
with the glory of God. The whole earth is filled with the Divine glory. 
The prophet said there should come a time when all flesh should see it 
together. In order that that might be so, He purchased the world. 

It is important to remember that the word “
buyeth ”
must not 
be interpreted here commercially. That word “
buyeth ”
may be used 
in other senses, where there is no commercial transaction. There has 
been a good deal of expository controversy over this. There are not 
wanting old and devout expositors who say that He bought the world 
back from Satan. Never !
He never recognized the right of Satan 
to this world at all. That is what Satan wanted Him to do, and he 
offered it to Him at a very cheap price comparatively, when he said, 
Give me a moment’s homage, and the kingdoms shall all be Thine. 

THE TREASURE HIDDEN 

But He never recognized the right of Satan anywhere. He was not 

buying it from Satan. 

Then equally devout expositors say He was purchasing it from God. 

But that is to divide God, and God is not divided. He was God, 

He was God in Christ reconciling the world to Himself. It was God 

in Christ Who purchased. Often the word is used in another way. A 

man says he will sell his life dearly. It does not mean he is going 

to offer it at a price. He is going to suffer in order to hold it. A 

mother will purchase the health of her child by long vigils. She is 

not paying the price to anyone. He purchased the field, which simply 

emphasizes the giving up of all things in the richest sense of that 

word. 

Stand back then from this picture, given to the disciples. It was not 
given to the men of the world. The outside crowd did not understand 
it any more than some to-day can understand. It can be understood 
only by men of living faith, faith in the unseen, believing in the reality 
of the unseen, and seeing things from that viewpoint. The man of 
faith in this age will be conscious of all that the man of sight sees, of 
everything that is named in those first four parables. Men of faith 
see all the facts of the case as Jesus saw them, with such clarity as 
those saw when He uttered these parables. Jesus was not deceived. 
He suffered from no delusion. He knew the delusion that so often 
has fallen upon the Christian Church, and holds many of those dear 
and loved members in thrall to-day in the view that we are to go on 
preaching the Gospel until all the world is converted. That will not be. 
He saw the facts, and nineteen hundred years bear witness to the 
accuracy of His outlook. The men of faith can see that which is not 
seen by the men of sight ;
but what the man of faith sees will never 
make him hopeIess,
because he also has this parable, and the one 
following. 

Once more, this parable is not final. Nothing here is said of future 
ages and methods of God in the history of the world. But it does say 
enough to steady the heart, and strengthen endeavour in the midst of 
our service. 

This parabIe 
then first reveals Christ’s estimate of the possibilityof the world, treasure hidden, but treasure still. The glory of everything 
in the government of God, in the Kingdom of heaven, the Kingdom 
of the rule of God, He saw it, the possibility. If we do not see 
that possibility, what wonder that we lose heart, that our hands hang 
down, and our knees become feeble, and we cease our efforts. He 
saw that possibility. 

But He saw more, that there was only one way of possessing that 
treasure, of bringing at last into full and final manifestation and glory ;
and that was the way of complete self-denial. “
He selleth all that He 
hath.” He held back nothing. As a good friend of mine said one 
Christmas morning, speaking of the love of God, that we do not 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

distinguish between the love of God and the love of Christ, and that in

order to rescue the race, “
He pauperized heaven for a season.” That 

may be a superlative way of putting it, but it pays for close investiga
tion, having an element of truth. He pauperized Himself.

Yet is there not behind it the warrant of inspired writing ?
“
Who 

though He was rich, yet for our sakes He became poor.” Never forget

that whatever the price, true it is that,

 
None of the ransomed ever knew, 
How deep were the waters crossed, 
Nor how dark was the night that the Lord passed through 
Ere He found the sheep that was lost.” 

The price was beyond all
our computation. ”
Not with silver and gold”
-that is commercialism-” but with the precious blood of Christ, as a

Lamb, without spot.” That is the mystery of the Deity in agony.

Do not forget, although the price was paid, although it was as great as

that, He procured the world. He bought the field. It became His

property. It is His property now.

The parable does not end all the story. It does not tell of other 
processes through which the world will pass but it does tell the Handthat holds the fee simple to the world, and it is the pierced Hand ofJesus. He bought the whole world, and that in itself is a guarantee ofthe ultimate realization of all the glory hidden and imprisoned.

The human heart may be inclined to say, Why hide it ?
Whyhinder it ? The necessary Why to the making of any such enquirybe the fact He did so proves it was necessary, and proves it was right.
It takes ages to grow an oak tree. A ladder can be made in a day.
God’s way appears the slow way, but He is growing the ultimate 
harvest of the world. May we get His vision, so we shall be preparedto render our service. 

13.
The 
Pearl 
Matthew xiii :
45, 46 

s
s
OME figures of this parable have appeared, those of treasure, and of 
treasure sought and bought, but there are certain new emphases.
The man here presented is a merchantman, who is seeking for thepossession of something by purchase. The treasure referred to by ourLord is of a peculiar kind-a pearl. The merchantman was seekingpearls, and he found one pearl of great price. The new emphases thenare the merchantman seeking for the possession of something bypurchase, that something being a pearl, and that of great price.
To understand this parable we need to examine carefully theseemphases, the merchantman and the pearl. That which is central i 

s
THE PEARL 

the pearl itself. We must be set free from the bondage of popular 

and traditional views in interpretation. It does not follow that what 

is popular is wrong, or that what is traditional is false. However it 

may be so in both cases. 

The general interpretation of this parable is that our Lord was 
teaching that He is the pearl of great price, and that the sinner is the 
one who seeks, and purchases, and possesses his Lord. Indeed, that 
interpretation has found expression in a hymn, not often heard now. 

“ 
I’ve found the Pearl of greatest price,
My heart doth sing for joy;
And sing I must, for Christ Ihave-
Oh, what a Christ have I1
”
It was very beautiful, but quite untrue to the teaching of this parable. 
To put it bluntly at the beginning, that is not a picture of the sinner 
seeking Christ. It is Christ seeking His Church. That covers the 
ground, and may carry at first little conviction perhaps. 

To begin then with this figure of the pearl. It is arresting to remember 
that the pearl was not counted precious by the Hebrews. They 
set no particular value upon it. The pearl is never mentioned in the 
Old Testament. Other stones are named and described by that 
marvellous phrase ‘ 
stones of fire,” but the pearl is not referred to. 
In the book of Job there is an interesting and wonderful passage in 
which he asked what was the price of wisdom, and named certain 
things by which wisdom cannot be bought. He named precious stones, 
and in the margin of the Revised Version we find,
when Job referred to 
“ 
crystal,” the revisers have inserted in the margin, “ 
or pearl.” Even 
marginal readings are not inspired. The Hebrew word there is figurative, 
and means something frozen, and the word “
crystal ”
far better 
interprets it than “ 
pearl.” Thus the pearl had no significance to the 
Hebrews, and there was no reference to it. 

When these Hebrew disciples listened to Jesus when He uttered 
this parable, I think they opened their eyes in surprise. A pearl I
A 
merchantman seeking pearls !
Nobody was particularly seeking pearls. 
Moreover, He made reference to the pearl as of “ 
great price.” Let it 
be admitted that among other peoples than the Hebrews there was a 
recognition of the value of pearls, and it is an interesting subject to 
trace. There was a growing sense of their value. Recent investigations 
have shown that in the regalia of kings which consisted largely of gold, 
inset with gems, actually pearls were found. In Nineveh pearls were 
very highly valued, more so than in other countries. 

To-day the pearl has become associated with the most precious 
things, and is of real value. In this parable then of the pearl, as theKing revealed secret things to men of faith, whatever His intention 
was, He turned to something which these people did not consider of 
value, and He laid tremendous emphasis upon its value. 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

What are the facts about real pearls ?
They are the products of 

a living organism. That is not true of any other precious stone, either 

of the sapphire, or the diamond, the ruby, the emerald, or any other. 

How is it produced ? The pearl is the result of an injury done to a 

living organism. A grain of sand gets within the shell of the oyster,

and injury is done to it. That which it injures covers it over with the 

nacre,
layer over layer, until the pearl is formed. Ethel Thorneycroft 

Fowler wrote these lines some years ago :
‘
A pearl is found beneath the flowing tide, 
And there is held a worse than worthless thing,
Spoiling the shell-built home where it dothcling-
Marring the life near which it must abide.” 

That is the history of the pearl. A living organism, injured by contact 

with a grain of sand, or something equally minute and the living 

organism answers the injury done with a pearl. So comes the precious 

thing. 

Again, it is a thing of priceless value and of great beauty, and is 
peculiarly an adornment. There is no real value in the pearl except 
embellishment, the adding of something to the one who possesses it, 
or the one who wears it. The very word translated “
pearl ”
is derived 
from a Sanskrit word which means pure. Every woman who bears the 
name of Margaret or Margarita, that is the meaning of the name. The 
pearl stands to-day in our thinking suggestive of purity. If that be 
so, the pearl is a symbol of purity resulting from wounding, which 
has been enclosed in that which has made it a thing of beauty, and asymbol of purity. 

Our Lord never used an illustration without complete understanding 
of all its height and length and breadth and depth ;
and when 
He said “ 
a pearl,” He knew whence the pearl came, and how the pearl 
was formed. He knew its real value. That is the first emphasis which 
arrests us. There is something different here from anything we have 
seen, nothing that contradicts, but something different. 

Then again, in the merchantman we see a man seeking goodly 
pearls. It is unthinkable that the man seeking pearls is seeking them 
merely for himself. Pearls in so far as their value was known then, 
were specifically and particularly for the adornment of kings. The man 
who was seeking them was seeking in order to provide that embellishment, 
that symbol of glory, for other than himself. The merchantman 
was seeking for pearls, not to hoard them, or to possess them, but for 
some other. Whether this man was purchasing and selling them doesnot come within our purview. Jesus said he sought for goodly pearls,
and he found one of priceless worth, It was a most wonderful victory. 
A pearl of resplendent beauty is referred to, and in order to possess it, 
he went and sold everything he had. 

Turning from that attempt to look at the picture in itself, we ask 

THE PEARL 

its interpretation. Here it is possible that some may be introduced to 

a line of thought and consideration which is new. We need not argue 

who the man is. He is the One Who has been named in other places 

as the Son of man but here He is seen as a merchantman. 

What is He doing ?
He is seeking pearls, and He finds one, Find
ing means here, He perceives, He ,discovers,
and He obtains. Our 

Lord is showing what was His mission in the world. This is a parable 

viewed from the standpoint of heaven’s outlook and interpretaticn.
Nothing here contradicts what we have seen of the application to the 

Kingdom principle, illustrated in the other parables. We are looking 

from the heavenly height, and we see this merchantman seeking, and 

seeing what He finds, and seeing how to obtain what He finds. Notice 

our Lord says, “
Having found one pearl of great price, he went and 

sold all that he had.” Went where ?
Went from the place where 

He was. Where was that ?
Heaven. That does not mean He left 

earth, and went away to purchase it, but He came to earth. The 

parable is viewing things from the heavenly standard. He has seen 

the pearl. He knows it, and desires to possess it, and He went to earth, 

and sold all that He had. It is a picture of the purchase of the Church 

of God, the whole Church. 

All kinds of questions arise, distinguishing between the Church and 
the Kingdom of God. There is a clear distinction, and in the ages that 
lie ahead there will be many who are ransomed who are not members 
of the great, mystical Church of Christ. But the view here is that of 
the Church. He went and found a pearl. With great reverence we 
may say He went, and by His action created the pearl. The pearl 
fastened upon Him, injured Him, harmed Him ;
and by His actionHe surrendered all that which wrought Him wrong, and harmed Him, 
until it, by transmutation, became the very costly pearl for which He 
was seeking. “ 
He sold all that he had.” 

With reverence take the picture of the pearl, and the process of its 
making, that action of a living organism that surrounds the tormented 
and unperceived thing with mother-of-pearl, with nacre,
until presently 
the pearl is formed. When Peter wrote his letter he said, “
Unto 
Whom coming, a living stone, rejected indeed of men, but with God 
elect, precious.” After that he said this, “
For you therefore which 
believe is the preciousness.” In the Authorised Version it reads, 
“ 
Unto you that believe He is precious.” That is a beautiful statement 
and thought, one of absolute truth. Is He not precious to us ?
But 
that is not what the apostle meant. It is not what he wrote. “
Unto 
you .
.
.
is the preciousness.” The Stone which the builders rejected, 
the same was made the Head of the corner and all that constitutes 
the good pleasure of God in Christ, “
My Son, in Whom I am well 
pleased.” The things in Christ that were precious to God, they are 
all made over to us. “ 
Unto you that believe is the preciousness.” 
But who am 1,
who are you ? We are the people who put Him on 

5 

.
PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

His Cross, who wronged Him, the glorious One, who caused His suffer
ing and His pain ;
and in an infinite mystery of power and grace, 

greater than the mystery and the wonder of the creating of the pearl 

in the oyster shell, He covered us over, and changed the thing of injury 

to the wanted thing, into a pearl of great price. 

So the whole Church is seen as the most wonderful and precious 

thing, resulting from the mission of the Son of man. The Kingdom 

is here, but also a gathered-out company constituting at last His 

Church. 

The parable does not tell us anything about the purpose. The 
picture is of what is going on in this age, the finding and the purchasing 
of this sacred thing. We are warranted, however, in deducing from 
it something more. What was the purpose of this purchase ? Roughly 
and commercially, what was the value of that pearl, to obtain which 
He sold all that He had in order to buy it ?
We cannot answer that 
fully in the terms of time, or in the terms of individual and personal 
experience. We cannot answer that fully in the terms of any one 
Church, or the Church at any given period in this age. We can answer 
it fully only when there is given to us to see the ultimate glory of the 
Church, and her ultimate vocation. 

We have never seen the Church of God. Churches, yes we have a 
conception of the universal Church, the holy, catholic Church as we 
call it ;
but we have never yet seen it. It is a sorry thing that Christian 
men, leaders quarrel among themselves. The day will come when we 
shall see that our quarrels have been concerned with scaffolding, but 
behind the scaffolding the Church is growing to a holy temple in the 
Lord. If we would find the final interpretation in the New Testamentof the value of the pearl He bought, of the value of the Church to 
God, we shall have to turn to one great letter, that to the Ephesians. 
In that Paul reached the culminating glory of his great theological 
system. That system began with the Roman letter, of which the one 
theme is salvation. Then there came to him the mystery of the Church,
and by stages he interpreted it. The ultimate glory is found in the 
twin epistles of Ephesians and Colossians. Colossians is concerned 
with the glories of Christ. Ephesians is concerned with the glories of 
the Church as she embodies and reveals the glories of Christ. 

Glance at two passages in the Ephesian letter. In the first chapter 
Paul made use of a remarkable phrase. He prayed that these Ephesian 
Christians and all others, might know Him, have full knowledge, 
epignosis,
“
What are the riches of the glory of His inheritance in the 
saints.” It is a daring thought, a tremendous thing. It lifts all our 
thinking about our holy religion from the commonplace of to-day and 
the littleness of our activities here, however true they may be, when 
we see that God gains something in His Church ;
that when Jesus 
sold all that He had to buy that pearl to flash in splendour upon the 
bosom of Deity, God was enriched. He is enriched not in essential 

THE DRAG-NET 

glory, but by finding a medium through which that essential glory 

can be revealed. 

Go on in the Ephesian letter to the fifth chapter. “
Christ also 

loved the Church, and gave Himself up for it, that He might sanctify 

it, having cleansed it by the washing of water with the Word, that He 

might present the Church to Himself, a glorious Church, not having 

spot or wrinkle or any such thing ;
but that it should be holy and 

without blemish.” The intrusive wounding sand is transmuted into 

the beauty of a pearl, and that for the honour of God. 

In the Ephesian letter there are two statements in which Paul tells 

what is the ultimate vocation of the Church. It is not earthly at all. 

She has her vocation here, and her responsibility in the world, which 

in our measure we are all attempting to fulfil. But the ultimate mean
ing of the Church is not for time, it is for eternity. It is not for earth, 

but for heaven, the place where all the company of the ransomed and 

redeemed will fulfil
a sacred mission. Paul has told us two things 

about that mission. In the ages to come we shall teach angels ;
and 

through us there will be manifested the grace and the glory of God. 

The Church’s vocation is that she will be the revealer of the infinite 

grace of God to all the ages, and to all the unfallen intelligences, the 

pearl of great price. 

“
He found the pearl of greatest price, 
My heart doth sing for joy;
And sing I must, for I am His,
And He is mine for aye.” 

It is our business to look for the Kingdom here, to pray for it, t o 
toil for it, to hope and expect its coming in fulness but do not forget 
that beyond the little spell of earth’s limited history there lie the ages, 
and in those ages the ransomed Church of God will be the pearl through 
which His grace and His glory are to be manifested. 

I+
The
Drag-Net
Matthew xiii :
47-50
T
T
HE PARABLE of the drag-net is the last concerning the process of 
the Kingdom in this age. These systematic parables of our Lord 
found in the thirteenth chapter of Matthew have to do with one age 
that began with His first advent and ministry, and which will end with 
His second advent. The dealings of God are not exhausted in any one 
age in which man is living. These parables, however, all concern this 
age, and illustrate the process of the Kingdom. 

This particular parable is still an illustration for men af
faith, 

PXRABLES 
AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

Retiring from the crowd, and the public, He gave certain parables 

that illustrated for these men of faith the Kingdom processes, no 

longer on the level of earthly observation or understanding, but from 

the level of heavenly purpose and intention. Such was the parable of 

the treasure in the field, and that of the pearl. Such is this parable of 

the drag-net. 

In our study of this parable of Jesus we are greatly aided by our 

Lord’s partial explanation. That begins with the word “
so ”
(v. 49). 

“ 
So shall it be in the consummation of the age.” Let it be understood 

at once that our Lord’s explanation of this parable is only partial, 

having to do with the final fact in the picture used, not with the casting 

of the net, nor even with the swaying of that net in the tides; but 

with the drawing of it in at the close. “
The consummation of the 

age ”
is the key to what our Lord emphasized concerning this 

parable. 

This is in itself significant, and enables us to place the emphasis 

of the parable in the right place. The net and its swaying to the 

moving tides are simply illustrations of the fact not here and now 

interpreted. But that which is interpreted, and therefore that upon 

which we must fix our attention, is our Lord’s description of what will 

happen presently, in what He speaks of as “
the consummation of the 

age.” It is the parable therefore of all these which supremely shows 

the method of the completion of this age, in which the Sower sows 

the Word. 

The main value here is that of the fact of separation which follows 
the drawing in of the net at the end of the age. Recognition of that 
fact will save us from wrong conceptions concerning this teaching. 
“ 
The Kingdom of heaven is like unto a drag-net.” In the Revised 
Version the word is “ 
a net,” but the marginal reading gives the literal 
translation of the Greek word, which explains its meaning, “
a dragnet.” 
Again, those fishermen listening to Him understood perfectly what 
He was talking about. That was one method of fishing. It had nothing 
to do with individual fishing. Here is no picture, such as Ezekiel gave, 
of fishermen standing on the banks of the river from Engedi toEneglaim. 
That is individual gathering in. This was not the idea in the 
mind of our blessed Lord when He said to His disciples, “
I will make 
you to become fishers of men ”
;
and on another occasion, You shall 
catch men alive. That marks individual life. This is something other. 

The fact is so simple that we need not dwell upon it. It is the 
picture of a great net that is let down into the sea, and is left, and it 
swings to the moving of the waters, and there are gathered into it 
fishes of all sorts, all kinds. Then towards the close of day, or early 
morning more often, the fishermen draw the net in, and as it comes in 
it enclosed a vast multitude of fishes. Some of them are of no use. 
Others are valuable. The fishermen are seen settled down on the shore, 

THE DRAG-NET 

and their first business is to sort and sift, to take out th6
valueless, 

the worthless, and leave in the good, gathering them together, after 

the worthless have been cast aside. 

Said our Lord, The Kingdom of heaven is like that in its con
summation. The Kingdom of heaven is like a net let down into the 

sea ;
and at the end of the age,
consummation of the age, there 

will come the drawing in of the net, and separation. 

The net here unquestionably stands for the Kingdom influence 

which is abroad in the world ;
and those enclosed are such as have 

come within the sphere of the Kingdom influence. There are parts of 

the world where there are multitudes who have never come within 

that sphere. The parable does not apply to such. Wherever the net 

has been spread, and wherever men and women have come under its 

influence, there the net is seen in the sea, that sea which is for ever
more the type in Holy Scripture of restless, moving humanity. Some
thing is let down into it. It is the message of the Kingdom, the fact 

of the Kingdom, the vision of the Kingdom, the ideals of the Kingdom, 

the teaching of the Kingdom. Remember, the Church is only in view 

here, in so far as its responsibility is concerned. It is not a question 

of finding a pearl, whose sacred function lies not in time, but in eternity. 

That was our previous subject. The Church in the world reveals the 

Kingdom, in herself, and is the instrument in the world of the influence 

of that Kingdom. 

Think of the age in the broadest way, and of the fact that the 
Church has been in existence for xgoo
years and more. Wherever she 
has been, men have seen something of the glory, beauty, and holiness,
and strength and majesty, and mercy and tenderness of the Kinship 
of God. Do not forget that has been so. Wherever that has been so 
the Kingdom influence has been felt. All sorts of reforms in human 
life, in affairs political, and affairs economic, are the result of the 
exercise of this Kingdom influence ;
and the Kingdom influence has 
been exerted by the Church of God. So the Church is here, but it is 
not the picture of the gathering out of the Church. It is the picture 
of something else. The race is not all here, only those parts of it 
where this Kingdom influence has reached, and only those are seen 
who by its influence have been in some measure, enclosed within 
the net. 

The process is then described, the process at the end, for that is 
the emphasis ;
what will happen as the result of the net being flung 
into the sea, left, enclosing all the while men, women-fishes. Jesus 
says, when it is filled, it is drawn in, and men gather the good intovessels, and the bad they cast away. So shall it be at the consummation 
of the age. “
The angels shall come forth and sever the wicked 
from among the righteous ;
and shaIl
cast them into the furnace of 
fire ; 
there shall be the weeping and gnashing of teeth.” In the forty-
first verse we get a similar picture of the consummation of the age, 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

” 
The Son of man shall send forth His angels.” ”
Angels shall come 
forth.” That is what He now said. In the sixteenth chapter, on that 
memorable occasion at Gesarea
Philippi, our Lord said, “
The Son 
of man shall come in the glory of His Father, with His angels ;
and 
then shall He render to every man according to his deeds.” So the 
process will be that of separation. 

Notice in this parable our Lord did not speak of the taking out of 
the world the good, but the taking away of the bad. The picture is 
wholly of this world. Heaven is not in view. The ultimate and eternal 
state is not referred to. It is an earthly situation at which we are 
particularly looking. The picture is wholly of this world, and the 
Kingdom, and its influence here. 

What happens ? The severance of the wicked that they may be 
destroyed from all human affairs. The words of our Lord are full of 
terrible solemnity. We have no more right to forget or neglect this 
word of Jesus than we have to forget or neglect that He said to 
humanity, “ 
Come unto Me, and I will give you rest.” There was the 
infinite wooing tenderness of Christ, but He never failed to see the 
ultimate issue of sin and of evil. His words are characterized by 
terrible solemnity. There shall be weeping, lamentation, and gnashing 
of teeth, a figure at once of pain or rage, or both. Persistent rebellion 
to the end of age, a separation between good and bad, drawn all into 
that Kingdom net, all having come within its meshes, and felt itsinfluence ;
and yet some utterly worthless, utterly bad ;
and the consummation 
of the age has this as its outcome with regard to Kingdom 
influence
the world, a separation. 

Notice that angels are to be the agents. We are living in a strange 
age. It is terrible how even godly people have become Sadducean about 
angels, and try to escape the clear declaration that at the end of the 
age angels will once more intervene in human affairs. They have interfered 
in human history and affairs in the past. This is not the age of 
the angels. It is the age of the Son. It is the age of the Holy Spirit. 
But Jesus said when this age is drawing to a close, angels will againactually, positively intervene in human affairs. Angels are serving 
to-day, but unseen and unknown very largely, but none the less 
definitely. We have our Bibles, and believe it. “
Are they not all 
worshipping spirits sent forth to minister to the heirs of salvation ?
”
It is rendered, “
Are they not all ministering spirits ?
”
but the word 
”
ministering ”
is different in the two places, “ 
sent forth to minister.” 
They are liturgical spirits, worshipping spirits. That is the function 
of the angels, worshipping in the presence of the Most High ;
but they 
are sent forth, their worship in the high places ceasing, to serve, to wait 
upon, to minigter to the heirs of salvation, 

Go back into the Old Testament, and study the sixth chapter of 
Isaiah, where the prophet saw the glory of God, and the thresholds 
shook, and the house was filled with smoke. He saw the seraphim 

THE DRAG-NET 
veiling their faces as they continually celebrated the holiness of God. 
“ 
Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts.” Liturgical spirits. 

‘
He maketh
His angels spirits,
And 
His ministers a flame of tire,” 

and there they exercise the highest function of their being, worshipping. 
When the prophet saw that he cried, “
Woe is me !
for I am undone ;
because I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a 
people of unclean lips ;
for mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord 
of hosts. Then flew one of the seraphim unto me, having a live coal 
in his hand, which he had taken with the tongs from off the altar ;
and 
he touched my mouth with it, and said, Lo, this hath touched thy lips, 
and thine iniquity is taken away, and thy sin purged.” Liturgical 
spirits, their high function, the worship of God ;
but if, peradventure, 
some soul cries out in the agony of conscious sin, they become ministers 
of God. 

We used to sing in old days, “ 
There are angels hovering round.” 
We do not often sing it now, but it is true. They are not seen. They 
do not come on to the plane of observation, but Christ distinctly said 
in that word at Czsarea
Philippi, and on these two occasions in these 
parables, that at the end of the age the angels will actually come into 
human affairs, to carry out His will, and His behests. They have been 
visible. They will be again. There are strange and wonderful pictures 
of angels, some of them full of suggestive beauty in art. One great 
picture, the title of which was, I 
He was despised and rejected,” was 
exhibited in London some years ago. It was wonderful, though the 
figure of the Christ did not satisfy me. The crowd surging round Himwas typical humanity, but the most wonderful thing to me was thebackground, the august and awful figure of an angel watching. Jesus 
said when this age comes to its consummation, the Son of man will 
send forth His angels. They will deal with this enclosed mass of fish, 
and will sort and sift it. Angel discrimination means heaven’s 
standards. Angel separation means heaven’s might at work, insisting 
upon the standards, and bringing everything to its measurement, at 
the end of the age. 

We often lose sight of this. Even the Church of God is so possessed 
oftentimes with the activities of the present. Action in the present 
loses half its significance, power, and value if we lose sight of the fact 
of the end of the age, and the issue of it. 

What is the issue ? This our parable does not declare. For purposes 
of understanding we may refer to the King’s previous and fuller statement, 
in verses forty-one to forty-three, where we have exactly the 
same figure of the consummation of the age, and the angels are seen. 

In this parable our Lord spoke of what would be done with the 
things found in that gathered-in net. In the previous parable He went 
beyond that, and showed what would happen to others, when the 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

angels have wrought their great work of separation. To put those 

two together, at the end of this age what will happen under angel 

intervention and ministry ?
First the cleansing of the Kingdom from 

all things that cause stumbling, and all that do iniquity-activities 

and persons. Think what would happen to-day, if suddenly all the 

affairs of the world were halted by the visitation of angel ministers, 

acting by the order of the King, and they began to deal with every
thing that caused stumbling to humanity, casting out all those who 

were workers of iniquity, the bringing of limitation and sorrow to such, 

not the limitation of sorrow that has in it the element of repentance, 

but the element of remorse, as witness the gnashing of teeth. Evil 

persistence to the very end is to be dealt with, gathered up, and cast 

out by angel ministry. 

What our Lord did not say in this parable, but did say in the 

previous one was, “
Then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in 

the Kingdom of their Father.” That is far more than a poetical figure, 

describing the blessedness that shall come to the righteous. It is 

much more than that. It is rather a figure of the influence that the 

righteous shall exert when all these evil things are removed, and they 

shine forth in the Kingdom of the Father. They will create the 

opportunity for goodness, and the opportunity of nations that have 

never been reached. 

Does that not bring halt and shock to some ? Surely all this is 
going on, until all nations have been reached, and all nations have 
bowed to Christ. Is that our view ?
It was not His. Never in one of 
these parables did He teach anything of the kind. He never suggested 
the work of the Church was to go on and on until all nations had bowedto Him, and kissed His sceptre, and crowned Him. He knew human 
nature better than that, and He knew all the things that so often have 
puzzled the Church, and made them at times feel as though everything 
was failing. He knew. But when that consummation of this 
age comes, as the prelude to other ages that lie beyond in earth’s 
history, the angels will gather out all these offending things, and the 
righteous will shine forth as the sun, and that will create the opportunity 
for other nations. 

The parable is of the nature of a look ahead. There are some 
senses in which to-day we have little to do with it, for the net is still 
swinging, and the Kingdom influence is still being exerted, and the 
reaches of the net are going further and further out, as every great 
society we call Missionary takes the Kingdom to the peoples of the 
earth. We have nothing to do with the pulling in of that net. We 
have far less to do with trying to sort the good and evil enclosed in its 
meshes. 

Yet in other ways this parable is a gracious source of strength as 
it assures us of a certain process that is going forward which will 
culminate in an advent, and a clear judgment, in which the King, our 

THE HOUSEHOLDER 

Lord and Saviour,
through His heavenly servants the angels, will visitearthly affairs, and that gives us all hope when we are inclined tolose it. 
That can’t end worst that began best, 
Though a wide compass round be fetched.” 
As we lift our eyes for a moment, not to tarry there, because wehave our immediate call and business, we look on and see the daywhen the pierced Hand will manifestly grasp the sceptre, and willcall the ministries of heaven to His service, in separating the evilfrom the righteous, the wicked from the good. 

I 5.
The Householder 

Matthew xiii: 51,
52 

THIS PARABLE is the completion of the octave found in this thirteenthchapter. “
He spake to them many things in parables.” So the 
movement began. At the fifty-third verse, “
And it came to pass,
when Jesus had finished these parables, He departed thence.” Those 
are the boundaries of this parabolic day in the teaching of Jesus. He 
spoke many things in parables, and when He had finished His teaching,
He departed.
This Iast parable is not concerned with the history of the Kingdomin the age, but with the responsibility of His disciples during that 
period. The parable in itself is very brief, and yet full of revealingsuggestiveness. It followed a question and an answer. That questionand answer must be borne in mind. The question was one which ourLord asked of these men who had listened to Him, and the answerwas their reply.
After the delivery of the four parables in public, and the three inprivate, in that same privacy Jesus said to His disciples, “
Have yeunderstood all these things ?
”
And they answered, “
Yea.” I
believe 
they were quite honest in their answer, but I do not think they hadfully understood. Events proved they had not grasped the real significance 
of all He had said. But they had gone so far ;
and however 
much we may say about their limited understanding, our Lord tookthem at their own valuation. Immediately He proceeded to utter thisparable. That “
therefore ”
is most significant. It leans back uponthe question and the answer. Have you understood ?
Yes, “
Therefore 
every scribe who hath been made a disciple to the Kingdom of heaven,”
that is who has received his instruction, and has understood all thesethings, “
is like a man that is a householder, which bringeth forth outof his treasure things new and old.” 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR I.ORD
That preliminary setting of the revealing parable marks the method

of treatment. First of all note the preliminary requirement as revealed;
and then that which is taught in the parable, the perpetual responsi
bility. If we have understood these things, something must happen,

something will result, because every scribe instructed to the Kingdom

of heaven, or made a disciple of the Kingdom of heaven, who has been

listening to the teaching, and is instructed, is like a householder.

“
Have ye understood all these things ?
”
Notice carefully, “
all 
these things.” In the very way in which our Lord asked the questionthere is revealed the fact that the parables are mutually explanatory,
that we are not prepared for whatever is to follow as to responsibilityuntil we have grasped the significance of all these things, the sower,
the darnel, and so all through the seven. They merge, they belong toeach other, all are necessary to an unveiling of truth concerning thisKingdom of heaven. Have we understood all of them
? Not one of 
them, but all these things in their interrelationship.

That is the preliminary question, and it is no use going on untilwe have faced it. He compelled the disciples to face it, and they werehonest as far as they went in their reply. But our Lord’s emphasis ison the word “ 
understood.” To understand is to put together, tocomprehend. In the question there is a recognition of the whole driftof the teaching as necessary to the fulfilment of the obligation, whatever 
that obligation is. “
Have ye understood all these things ?
”
In 
an arresting aside, because He was going straight on to an illuminativeword, He said to them “
Therefore.” Wherefore ?
Because you haveheard the things, and understood them, “
therefore every scribe whohath been made a disciple to the Kingdom of heaven is like unto aman.” 

Here are two synonymous’ terms, a disciple to the Kingdom ofheaven is therefore a scribe. Here our Lord did an arresting thing,
though it is possible we may not at first be arrested by it, or notice it.
It is that of His use of the word “
scribe ”
at that point. From the 
commencement of His ministry, and growingly, there was an order ofmen called scribes, and they were opposed to Him, “
the scribes and 
Pharisees.” Who were these men ? When our Lord foretold His 
suffering at Caesarea
Philippi, He said He must go to Jerusalem, andsuffer many things at the hands of chief priests, elders, and scribes.
That was no mere piece of rhetoric. He was describing the three ordersactually then existing in Jerusalem, and among the Hebrew people;
the priests, the spiritual rulers ;
elders, the civil rulers ;
and scribes, themoral rulers. The moral rulers had been opposed to our Lord throughout 
His ministry.

As a class the scribes arose in the time of Ezra. There was no order 
of scribes in Moses’ time. The scribes in Old Testament history werethe historians, and principally military historians. But in the time of 
Ezra there arose a new
order of scribes, and Ezra was the outstanding 

THE HOUSEHOLDER 

figure of that order. He made a pulpit of wood, and stood on it, from 

which he read the law, giving the sense. That does not merely mean 

he read correctly, and with clear articulation, though that undoubtedly 

is inferred. It simply means that he read the law and explained it. 

There was a great Bible movement, a Scriptural movement at that 

time under Ezra. So this order of scribes arose. They were men who 

read the law, and explained it ;
consequently they became the moral 

interpreters. 

As time wore on these men became more and more concerned with 

the letter of the law, and they attempted to safeguard it by building 

a fence around it. That fence consisted of the traditions that were 

supposed to interpret the law. In process of time it not only shut out 

the law, but shut men out from it, and men came to misunderstand 

the law through the traditions and teaching and interpreters, those 

men whose whole business was to interpret it. So in the time of 

Jesus He flung Himself in anger oftentimes against these traditions 

and these false teachers, the scribes, the official interpreters of 

the law. 

Again another reference. Upon one occasion in remarkable language 
our Lord quoted from them, calling them the interpreters of the law. 
He said they sat in Moses’ seat. Their business was to interpret the 
law of Moses, and Jesus set the seal of His authority upon the idea, 
never upon the men, but upon the idea. Going on, He said Therefore, 
because they sit in Moses’ seat, whatsoever they say unto you do it, 
only do not ye as they do. Thus He set His seal upon the authorityof that order. 

Christ had now been instructing His men, His disciples, thoserepresentative men who were to interpret the Kingdom of heaven to 
the world, and He named them by that same name ;
and in so doing, 
He transferred the fulfrlment
of an office from men who had failed to 
men who were to succeed them. In order to achieve the fulfilment of 
responsibility, therefore there must be understanding of the King’s 
teaching concerning the Kingdom in this age. 

Once again go back to these parables. According to Jesus, this age 
is to be one of conflict from beginning to end, characterized largely 
by human break-down and failure. But it is to be an age in whichGod accomplishes definite purpose both in the world and in human 
history, and in the creation of an instrument for the ages to come. 
Said Jesus, Have you understood these things, have you grasped My 
teaching ?
If you have a sense of what this age is to be like, you are 
to go out into it as scribes. 

Come now to the parable. Every such scribe, made a disciple himself 
to the Kingdom of heaven by the teaching of Christ, standing for 
it, every such one is like a householder. 

What is a householder ? One cannot interpret this parable by 
thinking of a householder in London. We use the phrase properly, but 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

it was an Eastern figure which our Lord employed. The word is 
Oikodespotes,
to translate that literally, a house-despot. -We do notlike the word despot. We have no reason to dislike it save whendespotism is evil. Then we have not only the right to dislike it, butwe have the right to fight it to the end. It is a word that marks 
tremendous authority, the house-despot. It is a picture of a shepherd,
father and king, all which phases are merged into one personality, oneat the head of affairs. To illustrate and illuminate, Jesus one day saidto these men, “ 
Fear not, little flock, it is your Father’s good pleasureto give you the Kingdom.” To the Western mind particularly it maylook as though our Lord were mixing His metaphors. A merely literarycritic might say, This Teacher is confused. He begins His statementwith a shepherd and a flock. He forgets it before He has gone far, andit is the man and his family. Then He forgets that, and the picture isof a nation and a king and Kingdom. But we know perfectly wellthat if the figures merge they do not mix. They reveal the threefoldaspect of a head of a clan, or a nation and people. The Arab shiek 
to-day at once is the shepherd of his people, the father of the family,
and king of the nation ;
and all these are involved in “
the householder.” 
The disciple to the Kingdom of heaven is like a householder.
That word “
householder ”
was on the lips of Jesus some ten or twelvetimes, and almost invariably He used it of Himself. It is the word 
that marks authority. The disciples were to be scribes, authoritativeinterpreters of the moral law.

What then does the householder do ?
He brings forth from histreasure house. He brings forth treasure. There are two words fortreasure in the New Testament. One means that which is laid up,
layer on layer, and kept. The other means that which is spent. The 
difference between a miser and a spendthrift is that a miser sayssovereigns are flat that he can hoard them ;
and the spendthrift saysthey are round, so that he can roll them, and get rid of them !
These 
two ideas are in the two words for treasure. We find them both in 
the Sermon on the Mount. Here it is the word which means laid up.
The householder is seen as having vast resources. What does he do 
with them ?
He brings them forth, and here the Greek word is scattersthem lavishly. It is a suggestion of bountifulness. He has themheaped up, but he is bringing them out, and scattering them everywhere. 
Then comes the remarkable phrase, “
things new and old.” Notice,
He did not say new things and old things ;
but the same things whichare new and old. These scribes, these disciples of the Kingdom, thesewho have heard and accepted His interpretation, and have understood,
are to go out, and they are to be householders, bringing out of theirtreasure things new and old. 

The whole picture is that of an authoritative ruler, lavishly scattering 
out of his wealth the things which are necessary for the supply 

THE HOUSEHOLDER 

and government of his household. That is the picture of all those who 

are instructed to the Kingdom of heaven. 

Disciples of Jesus are those seen as the true rulers of the age, as 

they correctly interpret the Kingdom, and represent Him in it. They 

have access to the eternal treasure-house, and in that treasure-house 

there are things new and old. Mark the arresting picture of these 

disciples of Jesus in the age. We see the age, on the human side, as it 

will be seen by men of sight. But we see also the Divine side, as it is 

seen in the purpose of God, having a far wider application than earth 

or time stretching out into the ages. That is the Kingdom of God, and 

therefore there is the treasure-house, and these disciples, made disciples 

to that Kingdom, by understanding that teaching, and that outlook, 

are to go forth to exercise the true authority. The scribe was the moral 

authority. So are we to be. 

That has been going on for nineteen hundred years. The Church 
has been doing that very thing. She has been exercising moral authority 
in the history of the world from Jesus until to-day. I know how 
she seems to have failed. Our Lord told us there would be failure. We 
must, however, think bigly and broadly enough of history. Every 
great moral sentiment that obtains in the thinking of the world to-day 
has come to it through the Church of God. Yes, failure again and again, 
but that thing still remains true. The emancipation of womanhood, 
the emancipation of slaves, the value of children, the bed-rock basis 
of marriage, al1
these things have come because of the scribes of the 
Kingdom, who have been interpreters of its moral law. Theirs is the 
final authority, not that of kings, and rulers, and emperors, and 
presidents, and parliaments ;
but of those scribes who understand the 
Kingdom, and are made disciples thereto. 

What are they to do ? They are to “
bring forth things new and 
old.” Jesus did not say to them they should bring forth new things, 
and old things. That is not two orders of things. It is two facts 
concerning the same things. They are one in essence. The principle 
is old, the application is new. The root is old. The blossom and the 
fruit are new. The old things are the eternal things, the eternal 
verities. The new things are the applications of those eternal things 
to the passing phases of changing times. “ 
Things new and old.” 
The two are necessary to growth. If we destroy the old, there will be 
no new. If we find an absence of new, we shall discover that the life 
of the old has ceased. Take an illustration from Nature. Go into the 
garden. If that root be dead, there is no blossom, and no fruit. If 
the old be dead, the new does not appear. Or look at it from the other 
side. Come into the garden, and if there is no blossom, no fruitage, 
we know that the root is dead. “ 
Things new and old.” The interrelationship 
therefore is a perpetual test. The new which contradicts 
the old is always false ;
and the old which has no new is dead and 
useless. “ 
Things new and old.” 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

Surely Russell Lowell had that great principle in mind when he 
wrote those lines that have become hackneyed by quotation, but still 
are so marvellously true, 

“
New occasions teach new duties, Time makes ancient good uncouth:
They must upward still, and onward, who would keep abreast of truth;
Lo, before us gleam her camp fires, we ourselves must pilgrims be,
Launch our Mayflower, and steer boldly through the desperate Winter 
sea, 
Nor attempt the future’s portal with the Past’s blood-rusted key.” 

But if we attempt the future’s portal with any key except the key 

that hangs upon the girdle of the King, we cannot unlock its door, 

but the key is always there. That is the old. The unlocked door is 

the new, and the Church has been called upon to pass through the 

centuries, and will, until the age ends, for evermore meeting new 

conditions with the old principles in new applications. Because the 

Kingdom of heaven is old, it has ever new applications, new methods, 

new manners. Men may change, but the Kingdom of heaven, the 

Kingdom of God, remains for ever rooted in the nature of God, and it 

blossoms fresh in every generation among the sons of men. 

So we can summarize. What is meant by the old ? The Kingship 
of God. What is meant by the new ?
The application of the old, 
nationally, socially, and individually, at all times, That is the responsibility 
of all those who are named scribes, those set in authority as 
householders. The treasure-house is there. The business of such is 
to bring the treasure forth, and seek its revealing. For evermore our 
view of the age must be His view of it. Then our influence will be 
His influence, bearing fruit for the Kingdom of God. All the other 
phases are there in the other parables, and are manifest throughout 
the teaching of our Lord ;
but this is the great final parable in the 
octave, of application to us, and of our responsibilities. 

I 6. Parabolic Illustrations 

Matthew xv 

I
I
N THIS fifteenth chapter we find a parable, and a parabolic illustration. 
The parable is in the eleventh verse, and our Lord’s explanation 
occurs in verses seventeen to twenty. Then in connection with 
another incident in His ministry we have a parabolic illustration in 
verse twenty-six.
It is necessary that we understand the subject which He was 
illustrating, when He uttered a parable. To do that we must go back 
to see the occasion upon which our Lord used these words and
this
illustration. 

PARABOLIC ILLUSTRATIONS 

79 

There had come to Him a deputation from Jerusalem. By this 

time He was approaching the end of His third year of ministry. That 

third year culminated at C&area
Philippi, which account is in the 

next chapter. So He was approaching the end of the central period 

of public propaganda, so full of interest. Hostility to Him on the part 

of the rulers, spiritual, moral, and civil, which had manifested itself 

from the beginning, had grown with the passing of the years. Here 

they sent down to Him a deputation from Jerusalem with the explicit 

purpose undoubtedly, of somehow entangling Him, or asking for some 

explanation of things they did not understand, and to which they had 

most strongly objected in His teaching, and finally as that teaching 

had manifested itself in the conduct of His disciples. 

The whole Hebrew religion at that time was suffering under the 

intolerable burden of tradition. Indeed, tradition had so covered over, 

submerged, the law of God that men were not familiar with the law. 

They were far more familiar with the tradition. How constantly our 

Lord
in speech and action flung Himself against prevailing tradition
alism. Here that is what manifested itself. We can hardly realize 

what that meant then. The whole system of religion had passed under 

its yoke and incubus, and was in slavery to it. In a previous chapter 

we have dealt fully with this subject. To give two actual quotations 

from the rabbis of the time. “
The words of the elders are weightier 

than the words of the prophets.” Or another, “
Some of the words of 

the law and the prophets are weighty, others are not weighty. All the 

words of tradition are weighty words.” 

It is impossible to go into all the meticulous divisions of these 
traditions, and how on every hand what was Iegal
by tradition, was 
supposed to interpret the law of God. Take this case in point. These 
men had come down from Jerusalem to Jesus, and they had asked 
Him, Why do Thy disciples transgress the traditions of the elders 
when they eat bread ? They owned they were thinking about the 
tradition of the elders. They had seen the disciples of Jesus transgress 
that tradition, ignore it, fail to observe it. 

The discipIes
were eating bread with unwashed hands. There was 
no tradition that a man should wash his hands before food in order 
to cleanliness. It was not cleanliness that was in view, but ritual. 
All these traditions had become impregnated by superstition, and the 
rabbis were declaring that Shibta, a demon, sat upon the hands of 
men as they slept, and ceremonial washing was necessary, or food 
would be contaminated by the presence of that demon upon their 
hands, while they were asleep !
We are inclined to smile at it. But 
there are people doing things to-day quite as foolish as that. 

That was the hour and atmosphere that drew forth this reply from 
Jesus. He flung
back upon them their own tradition. They had 
charged the disciples with transgression of the traditions of the fathers. 
He said, “
Why do ye also transgress the commandment of God because 

PARARLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

of your tradition ?
”
Then He gave them another tradition which they 

had transgressed. God had said, ‘
Honour thy father and thy mother ;
and, He that speaketh evil of father or mother, let him die the death.” 

They were saying, “
Whosoever shall say to his father or his mother, 

That wherewith thou mightest have been profited by me is given to 

God,” or “
Corban ”
as in the Old Version. The mystic word can be 

pronounced upon anything, as “
do wrong !
”
But our Lord uttered 

this tremendous word, “
Ye have made void the word of God because 

of your tradition.“ “ 
Ye hypocrites.” 

Having answered the deputation, He uttered this parable to the 
multitudes. It was a parable characterized by the greatest simplicity, 
that could not be misunderstood. He led them to face the fact of the 
physical organism. He showed them that physical organism deals 
with physical aliment, that it has no reference to moral cleanness or 
defilement. Notice carefully, “
Not that which entereth into the mouth 
defileth the man.” Then at once linking the thought with that other 
word, words proceeding out of the mouth, coming up out of the 
thoughts, they defile the man, because when thoughts are evil, words 
are evil, and acts are evil. So by the false thinking and heart, the very 
flesh may be defiled. The sustenance of the flesh can have in it no 
defiling element. It is not that which enters into a man that defiles 
him, but that which comes out of the deeper fact of his nature, out of 
his heart, out of the realm of mind and spirit, mastering the activities 
of the flesh, thoughts producing acts, reacting in defilement. 

The teaching here is important. The flesh in itself is not evil. I t 
does not defile. Paul, and other New Testament writers constantly 
refer to the flesh as being that against which we have to watch andbattle, which is true in certain ways. But the flesh inherently is not 
evil. That is an oId
Gnostic heresy which cursed the early Church, 
and against which the writings of Paul were directed. There is nothing 
inherently evil in flesh, and therefore that which sustains flesh could 
not defile. If we take food, it strengthens us in physical powers, 
because the flesh in itself is not inherently evil, and therefore it is not 
defiled. 

But a man pondering in his heart evil thoughts, may be led by so 
doing to the expression of words which presently will find further 
expression in deeds, and those very deeds will defile the flesh.
The 
flesh which is not inherently evil may become contaminated, harmed, 
and may become the very instrument of destruction and death. But 
that is not the result of the food eaten. Consequently to believe 
contamination resulted was stupid, to use no stronger word. The 
observance of external rules has no power to touch the inward spring 
of action. We may observe all the rules, we may sign all the pledges, 
and we may not eat that food, nor drink that drink, nor go to that 
place ;
but the inner, spiritual life is not touched by these things. 

Paul warned some to whom he wrote against worship of the will, 

PARABOLIC ILLUSTRATIONS 

when he wrote of being subject to ordinances, “
Handle not, nor 

taste, nor touch.” It is a curious thing that these words are often 

quoted as giving good advice. Paul said it was bad advice. All that 

is of no value to the purifying of our flesh. That is what our Lord was 

teaching here.

There was profound significance in that word of Jesus to Nicodemus. 

I take it reverently beyond the application He made of it. “
That 

which is born of the flesh is flesh, and that which is born of the Spirit 

is spirit.” There is a clear distinction. That which is born of the flesh 

is not inherently evil. That which is born of the spirit may become so, 

and may react even upon the flesh, upon the physical being. 

Read again His own explanation. “
Whatsoever goeth into the 

mouth passeth into the belly, and is cast out into the draught.” That 

cannot defile the man. ” 
For out of the heart come forth evil thoughts.” 

He then gave a list of the things by which even the flesh becomes 

defiled ;
but “
to eat with unwashen hands defileth not the 

man.” 

The parable was for the listening multitudes, in the presence of 
those rulers who were hiding the commandment of God, and making 
it of none effect by their tradition. It also stands for evermore as a 
warning against adding anything as a final authority in life to the law 
of God itself. That is the consummate wrong that is being done by 
the Roman theologians. Our Roman friends tell us we can read the 
Bible, but we must not interpret it. We must accept the interpretation 
of those in authority, the Church, as they say. That is what these 
men of old said. We have the law of God, but it cannot be interpretedsave through tradition ;
and whenever tradition, whether of a priest, 
or a prophet, or a Bible teacher, is put in the place of authority over 
life, we are violating our own spiritual need, and wronging the Word 
of God. Only as priest, prophet, or teacher can lead men into the
living presence of the Word is there any value in his work. Everything 
else
is mere
tradition, which ultimately hides
the
value
of the 
truth of God. 

A brief reference to the parabolic illustration. There is no connection 
between the parable spoken to this deputation, or to the multitudes 
after the deputation came, and this story, except that directly after 
this, our Lord “
went out from thence, and withdrew into the parts of 
Tyre and Sidon ”
(v. 21).
It was a significant action of our Lord. He 
crossed the border line between strictly Jewish and Gentile territory. 
Tyre and Sidon were outside Jewish territory. So was Decapolis. 
Our Lord first went up to Tyre and Sidon, and then went down to 
Decapolis. In Tyre and Sidon this woman met Him, outside Jewish 
territory, outside the ritual of the Jewish covenant. Here, and inDecapolis He was among those not of the Jewish faith, but among 
the Gentiles. He had turned from Israel which, for the moment 
through its rulers, was manifesting hostility to Him. He had gone 

6 

a2
PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

away, and had entered into a house, and would have no man know it. 

He had gone for quietness. 

Then that wonderful statement is made which flames with light. 

“ 
He could not be hid.” We read elsewhere that upon occasion He hid 

Himself, and they could not find Him when He was in the middle of 

a crowd. Why could He not be hid here ? Because there was a woman 

outside the house in trouble. It was to that woman He used that 

curious parabolic illustration, “ 
It is not meet to take the children’s 

bread, and cast it to the dogs.” This is not strictly a parable, but a 

parabolic illustration. Jesus had crossed the border line into foreign 

territory. He was in the parts of Tyre and Sidon, which means the 

environs. The woman came out from thence. The attitude of Jesus 

towards her was the attitude of the Messiah towards an outsider. 

When she cried first of all He did not answer. First He had come 

out to see her. He could not be hid, and in that first sentence we have 

a wonderful illumination of everything that followed. He then main
tained silence when she cried, and His disciples besought Him to give 

her what she wanted, and let her go. Then He said, “
I am not sent 

except to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.” He was the Messiah 

of Israel. 

Notice carefully here in the outcome of the story how that phrase 
finds a remarkable interpretation; and in the use of it in all that 
followed, He turned from the flesh to the spirit. We read it, “
the lost 
sheep of the house of Israel,” and we think, as these men did, in the 
realm of the flesh. He had said He was not sent but to the lost sheep 
of the house of Israel. Then she addressed Him, not as the Hebrew 
Messiah, but with the universal title, “ 
Lord, have mercy on me.” 
Then He said this strange thing to her, “
It is not meet to take the 
children’s bread, and to cast it to the dogs.” 

Our Lord used an uncommon word for dogs. As a matter of fact it 
is the only place in the New Testament where it occurs, and it is a 
diminutive, “ 
little dogs.” Behind that lies the whole Eastern picture. 
The dogs that were an abomination at that time were the wild, half-
wolfish, marauding dogs, those in the mind of Paul when he wrote, 
” 
Without are dogs.” In those Jewish homes there were little dogs, 
domestic dogs, pets of the children, who gathered round the board. 
Our Lord did not use the word referring to the prowling, fierce, marauding 
dogs, held in horror. He used the word that denoted the little dogs, 
when He said, It is not meet to take the children’s loaf, and cast it to 
the little dogs. 

Then the woman answered, Yea, Lord, but these little dogs eat of 
the crumbs. Whatever we may think of that answer, notice what Jesus 
thought. “ 
0 woman, great is thy faith.” What a wonderful process 
is seen here. When He used this figure, He softened it by the term 
He employed for dogs. He was sent to the lost sheep of the house of 
Israel. The loaf is not to be flung to little dogs. But when the woman 

PARABOLIC ILLUSTRATIONS 

said, They eat the crumbs, by that word she confessed her complete

faith. It was the woman’s victory. An old Puritan father has said that 

in that last word she manifested the perfect wit of a woman. Yes, it

was wit, but it was faith-inspired wit, for Jesus said so, “
0 woman,

great is thy faith.”

Yet by that last parabolic illustration our Lord reached the climaxin a process from the beginning. Outside the covenant He had been 
feeling after faith, knowing that it was there in the heart of that 
woman. That is why He had come out to see her. She did not know 
much about Him, but His fame had spread ;
but her agony was there,
and the germ of faith. He took the method of manifesting it, and insuch wise as to say, “ 
So great faith.” It was the Lord’s victory.

And mark this. He did not go outside His commission. She wasone of the lost sheep of the house of Israel. She proved herself by herfaith to be the child of Abraham. Those who were of Abraham after 
the flesh were not all children of Abraham, but those who were ofAbraham by faith. Here that illustration is brought into visibility bythat apparently harsh answer of Jesus, which was not unkind. It was 
an opportunity for such a confession of faith, and the demonstrationof the fact that the woman had her place, not in the fleshly covenant,
but in the covenant of God with His Israel after the spirit, and thechildren who are of faith. 

I 7.
Parabolic Illustrations 

Matthew xvi 

H E SIXTEENTH chapter contains no parable, but five suggestiveTparabolic illustrations, of weather forecasting, of the leaven in anew setting ;
and closely together, three parabolic illustrations of agreat theme, rock, gates, and keys.

Look first at weather forecasting. We think we live in an advanced 
age, because we have weather forecasts. Evidently they had them inthe time of our Lord. ‘
When it is evening ye say, It will be fair 
weather, for the heaven is red ;
and in the morning, It will be foulweather to-day for the heaven is red and lowring.” Jesus knew about 
weather forecasting, and He employed it.

Note the subject which He intended to illustrate and illuminewhen He made use of that particular figure of speech. The Pharisees 
and Sadducees
had come to Him requesting a sign from heaven. On 
other occasions they had asked a sign, but at this time they wereparticular. They wanted a sign from heaven.

In our familiarity with these words, we may not understand thesignificance of their conjunction in that statement. The two great 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

parties in the Jewish State at that time were divided philosophically, 
theologically, politically, and socially. They had no dealings with each 
other and were constantly in conflict. “
The Pharisees and Sadducees 
came,” a coalition formed for the one purpose of trying Jesus. They 
came “ 
tempting Him,” that is, trying Him, testing Him. These men 
had nothing in common. They were all the time at daggers drawn. 
The Pharisees were the ritualists in religion, and the Sadducees were 
the rationalists. The Pharisees believed that Rome had no right to 
have any authority over them. The Sadducees submitted to the 
Roman authority, and insisted upon it. Yet they came now in a 
united effort to put Jesus in such a position that would reveal the 
truth of their contention that He was an impostor. That was their 
purpose. They asked for a sign from heaven, and the very request 
as it was preferred, showed that they intended not to deny the things 
He had done, but to cast aspersion upon them. 

In the twelfth chapter Matthew has recorded the fact that the 
Pharisees did not deny our Lord had cast out demons ;
but they 
affirmed He had done so because He was in league with Satan himself. 
Now they came to ask for a sign from heaven. Signs were everywhere, 
casting out demons, healing disease. Signs had been multiplied. He 
went about, doing good. As Peter said on the day of Pentecost, He 
was a Man approved of God by powers and wonders and signs which 
God did through Him. Signs were everywhere. Yes, but these men 
said it was possible to account for all the wonderfu1
things He had done 
on a low level. They had said the casting out of demons was the result 
of complicity with the devil himself. Now they came to Him and asked 
for a sign from heaven, expressing their disbelief that anything He 
had done had behind it heavenly authority, or heavenly power. There 
is little doubt they were asking for some spectacular manifestation. 
Some sudden illumination of the night by supernatural light would 
have done nothing to convince them ;
so
they suggested some appearance 
in the heavens, in the midst of the brightness of the day, that 
would bring conviction ;
something supernatural from heaven that 
could have come from nowhere else. 

Now note our Lord’s reply to them. ”
When it is evening, ye say 
.
.
.
”
We read next, “
It will
be . . .
That little phrase is not in 
the Greek, neither here nor in the next verse. The italics mean that 
the words have been supplied by translators to give sense. Read it 
bluntly, without the words. “
When it is evening, ye say, Fair weather 
.
.
.
in the morning, Foul weather to-day,” That was something with 
which they were all familiar. Christ was quoting from their commonplace 
speech. They had said it often undoubtedly. It must be remembered 
the illustration is peculiarly Palestinian. It was the aspect 
of the sky in Palestine ;
but it is equally true in England to-day. Many 
will remember the old saying, “ 
A red morning is a shepherd’s warning ;
a red night is a shepherd’s delight.” Travelling over the vast expanses 

PARABOLIC ILLUSTRATIONS 

of ocean, we always notice whether the morning or evening was red. 

This was a commonplace figure of speech Jesus used. 

Then He applied it. He said to these men that they were intelligent 

on a certain level, and within certain limitations. They knew how to 

discern that red morning and that red night. They were significant. 

As they watched the face of the sky they were clever in surface observa
tion, but they could not discern the signs of the times. 

Notice this carefully. He flung them back upon their own request. 

They had asked for a sign. The signs were all about them. They had 

observed phenomena, and had come to correct conclusions about the 

weather. They did not fail in accurate weather forecasting, but they 

could not see the meaning of the things in the midst of which they 

were living, “ 
the signs of the times.” 

Then He told them why this was so. “
An evil and adulterous 
generation seeketh after a sign ;
and there shall no sign be given unto 
it, but the sign of Jonah. And He left them, and departed.” Why 
were they blind ? Why could they not understand ?
Why could they 
not discern the real meaning of the things in the midst of which they 
were living ?
They were evil, an adulterous generation. Those were 
terrible words. They were evil, @zeros,
harmful in their influence, 
because evil in their hearts. The moral nature was warped, because 
of the evil of their spiritual nature, which was atrophied. 

He then fell back upon that appalling figure of the Old Testament, 
with which these men would be familiar if they had their own Scriptures, 
“ 
an adulterous generation.” How constantly the great writers 
of the past had referred to these people under the figure of a marriage 
relationship. Said Jehovah, ‘ 
I have betrothed thee unto Me.” Again 
and again the prophets charged them with adultery, infidelity in their 
relationship to God as their Husband, Master, and Friend. Jesus swept 
the whole of that generation into that description, “
evil and adulterous.” 
That was the reason for their blindness. They were evil because 
they were adulterous. They had been unfaithful to their covenant 
with God, and the result of that was that they were harmful, evil in 
their hearts, and hurtful in their influence. Therefore they were 
blind. 

Seeing all these signs, they could not discern them. There would 
be one sign, full and final, the sign of Jonah. On another occasion He 
put that more fully when He said, “
As Jonah was three days and three 
nights in the belly of the fish ;
so
shall the Son of man be three days 
and three nights in the heart of the earth.” The ultimate full and 
final sign of authority would be that of His death and resurrection,
and no other sign would be given than that. He turned His back upon 
them, He left them. They had ability to observe natural phenomena, 
and to make correct deductions in forecasting the weather ;
but utter 
inability to understand the commonplace things of His power and 
majesty, which had been apparent to them in the course of His ministry. 

8 6 PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

This was because of their infidelity in heart, resulting in an evil nature, 

and so in spiritual blindness. 

No application is needed save perhaps to declare that this always 

abides. Take the world to-day with its great advancement which 

cannot be denied. All this weather forecasting is marvellous, whether 

a depression is here, or there, and the way it is likely to move. We 

can discern in England the signs of the weather. But can we discern 

the signs of the times ? Have we caught the significance of the things 

Jesus, not did, but is doing ?
If so, remember there is one great sign 

that brooks no denial. It can be evaded by supposed intellectuality, 

but it remains the central fact of all history, the death and resurrection 

of Jesus. 

Pass now to the second illustration in this chapter, contained in 
verses five and twelve, that of the leaven. We have studied that figure 
before in one of the parables. Take it here as Jesus used it. The 
subject that He was illustrating here was that of false teaching, and 
what it meant in human life as to its influence. The Pharisees and 
Sadducees, in a coalition, were attempting to entrap Him. Now the 
evil of the teaching of the Pharisees was their attitude towards tradition. 
That made sin purely external. Here was the reason of our Lord’s 
constant conflict with them. The spiritual and moral conceptions of 
these Pharisees and Sadducees were radically opposed to Jesus. The 
teaching of the Sadducees created the right to, and the opportunity 
for, indulgence in every form of material living, All their policies were 
based upon that materialistic and naturalistic conception of life. The 
Pharisees who professed to believe in angel, Spirit, and resurrection, 
had so covered over these essential truths of life and religion with their 
traditions, which they suggested were interpreting these things, were 
really throttling them, smothering them, killing them as to vital power. 
Our Lord now dealt with this teaching of the Pharisees, and in that 
connection used this figure of leaven. 

What does leaven mean ? Let us take a definition from a scientific 
text-book. It is “ 
a chemical decomposition of an organic compound.” 
Of course when we get away from our Bible we get simplicity of 
language !
An “ 
organic compound,” that is life, the organism ;
but 
leaven is the “
decomposition ”
of that compound organism. In other 
words, leaven is that which destroys, it is fermentation. It is something 
which always breaks up, and ultimately destroys. It is quiet and 
insidious, but terrible in its working, and yet persistent. As Paul said, 
“ 
A little leaven leaventh the whole lump.” In his Corinthian letter 
he referred to those Judaizing teachers who were seeking to superimpose 
the Pharisaic philosophy upon Christians under the titIe
of Judaism, 
that is Pharisaism, and he called that leaven. 

Our Lord warned His disciples against the danger of their teaching. 
It is arresting, however, to notice that when He said, “
Beware of the 
leaven of the Pharisees,” even His disciples did not understand Him, 

PARABOLIC ILLUSTRATIONS 

and they were materialized by the influence of their age. They thought

He was talking about the fact that they had forgotten to take bread

on the ship, which called forth from Jesus a word of tender rebuke,

“
How is it that ye do not perceive that I spake not to you concerning

bread ?
”
These men who came and asked for a sign were blind. Are 

you blind too ?
Can you not understand ? Then He told them what

He meant, and then they understood that He spoke of the leaven of

the Pharisees,

The value of that illustration to them, and to us for all time is 
that it lays emphasis upon the danger of false teaching, even thoughthat false teaching be given in the name of religion. The Phariseesclaimed to be religious teachers. The Sadducees
claimed to be religiousteachers, even though their philosophies and theologies were fundamentally 
opposed. But they were claiming to teach religion. Theyput upon the teaching of religion a false conception and outlook, andunderstanding, a leaven which brought about the decomposition of theorganic compound. False teaching is a leaven that for ever destroys.
There can be nothing more important than that teaching in the nameof religion, in the name of Christianity, nay, in the name of Christ,
should be according to His outlook, His power, and His will ;
anythingelse works fermentation, decomposition, and ruin.

So, having rebuked the seekers after a sign, and revealed the reasonof their failure, that they were blind because evil, and evil becauseunfaithful to God, He warned His disciples against their teaching,
using the figure of leaven.

We come to the last illustrations in this chapter, the figuresused-
rock, gates, and keys. The passage is well known. Simon Peter hadjust made his confession, expressing, as I believe, not only the conviction 
of his own heart, but of the whole group about Him. “
Thou art 
the Christ,” the Messiah, that is, His office. As to nature, “
Thou 
art the Son of the living God.” Jesus responded to that confession byuttering a beatitude upon the man, “
Blessed art thou, Simon, son ofJonah, for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but MyFather which is in heaven. And I also say unto thee .
.
.
Do not 
miss the “
also.” It is signiiicant.
Why did Jesus say “
also ”
? 
Thou hast made thy great confession concerning Me. Now I have some 
confession to make to thee, some secret to reveal which I have nevertoId
you before. He began with Peter personally. “
Thou are Peter,”
thou art fietros,
a piece of stone ;
‘
and upon this rock“
essential rock ;-
I will build My Church, and the gates of Hades shallnot prevail against it. I will give unto thee the keys of the Kingdomof heaven.” Rock, gates, keys, three illustrations flaming with light,
shining in the great declaration.

“
This rock.” What subject was He illustrating ?
The fact of His 
Church, “
I will build My ecclesia,” different from everything that hadgone before, even in the economy of God. The Hebrew nation had 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

been God’s ecclesia, His called out and separated people, for the 

fulfilment
of function, but it had failed. Its Pharisaic and Sadducean 

rulers had been in unbelief to ask for a sign from heaven a short time 

before. They had utterly failed. 

Then has God failed ?
I hope He will forgive me for suggesting 

the question. God never fails. Everything may look as though God 

is being beaten out of His world. He is not. He never fails. If that 

old economy, which God created, has broken down and failed, then 

“ 
I will build My Church.” It is the great authoritative word of Jesus, 

declaring that He would establish an institute for the fulfiIment
of the 

Divine purpose, and the accomplishment of the Divine end. He used 

first of all the figure of rock, that He would build upon rock. 

Remember that He was talking to Hebrews, to a group of men 
belonging to that ancient nation which He would presently excommunicate. 
They would understand the figure He used. Rock. How 
was that figure of speech used in the literature of the Hebrew people ? 
Turn back to the Old Testament, and look at the occasions where the 
figure of rock is used in a figurative sense, and there are over forty such. 
“
Rock ”
is only used figuratively in the Old Testament of God. Upon 
one occasion, in Deuteronomy, in the Swan Song, Moses used the 
word as of false gods, putting them into contrast with the true. “
Their 
rock is not as our Rock.” Through Moses and the prophets, rock is 
always used, reserved, not by the intention of the writers, but by the 
intention of the Holy Ghost, as a figure of God Himself, essential 
Deity. 

“ 
Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God.” ” 
On this Rock,” 
of essential Deity, “ 
I will build My Church.” The Roman Church 
still believes and teaches that the rock was Peter. Our Protestant 
Churches are saying the rock was Peter’s confession. A poor foundation 
that. In a few days he was swearing he had never seen Him. The 
Rock is God, and Christ says, “
I will build My Church ”
;
I will build 
back into relationship with the living God human souIs,
and so create 
My ecclesia. 

What about the figure of the gates ? He had swiftly changed the 
figure of speech, from building to battle. The gates of Hades shall 
not prevail. What are gates for ?
To guard the city against the enemy. 
The gates of Hades shall not prevail. How often that has been interpreted 
as though our Lord said, My ecclesia is built on a rock so 
strongly that Hell cannot overcome it. Oh no; He wiIl
build on 
rock, and that proves its invulnerability. But now He said, Hell shall 
not be able to withstand the attack of the Church. It is not a picture 
of the Church invincible against attack. It is a picture of the Church 
invincible in attack, so that the very gates of Hades shall not prevail 
against it. With the eye of a great Commander, the Lord saw 
the whole Church, and the last enemy, death ;
and the Church victorious, 
as she ever has been. No, they are not defeated, our loved 

A PARABLE AND PARABOLIC ILLUSTRATIONS Sg
ones, defeated in death. They are victorious in the hour of death, 

over all the power of Hades. The gates of Hades shall not overcome 

them. 

Again another change of figure, from those of building and battle, 

to that of moral influence, “
I will give unto thee the keys of the 

Kingdom of heaven.” Again we can interpret that figure of speech 

only according to the times. It was perfectly familiar. That great 

order of scribes for a long time had looked upon keys as the insignia 

of their office, as the interpreters of the moral law. So He made use 

of the figure to show that the Church was not only to be built on 

rock, and therefore invulnerable ;
not only to be the attacking force 

against which the force of Hell should not prevail ;
but that she should 

be in the world to enforce the laws, in the sense of moral standards ;
to bind, to declare that which is obligatory ;
to lose, to declare that 

what is voluntary. So in these figures used by our Lord, rock, gates, 

and keys, eternal truths are revealed concerning the Church which He 

is building. 

I 8. A Parable and Parabolic Illustrations 

Matthew xvii and xviii 

IN THESE two chapters we have two parabolic illustrations and one 
set parable ;
first the illustration of the grain of mustard seed, and 
then the parabolic illustration of the quest for the lost sheep. At the 
end of the eighteenth chapter we have the parable of the two debtors. 
It is important that we should remind ourselves of the subject 
which our Lord was intending to illustrate when He used, either parabolic 
illustration or more set parable, in order not only to understand 
the parable or illustration, but to put the true limits upon them. I t 
is possible to take a parable of our Lord away from the setting and 
context, and misinterpret its intention. 
We ask then, when our Lord took this parabolic illustration of the 
grain of mustard seed, what was He intending to illustrate ?
The 
teaching arose on account of the disciples’ failure on an outstanding 
and memorable occasion. Jesus had taken three of them away fromthe group. Nine had been left behind, and to them there had come 
a man bringing his boy, his only begotten son, demon possessed. The 
twelve when they had been sent out had all been given authority and 
power to cast out demons, and they had done this very thing. Here, 
however, was an occasion when they could not do it. When our Lord 
came down from the mountain and faced the father, he had said to 
Him bluntly, “
I
brought him to Thy disciples, and they could not 
cure him.” They could do nothing. 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

When the Lord had cast the demon out, and given the boy backto his father, the disciples came and asked Him the secret of theirfailure. It would be a great thing if the Christian Church to-day, in itsactivity, paused long enough to ask Him the reason for its comparativefailure. These disciples did so, and immediately He gave them firsta direct answer, and then used this illustration to illuminate His 
own answer. His answer to them was quite simple. “
Because of yourlittle faith.” Here I like the Authorized rendering better than theRevised, because this does not apply to quantity here, but to quality,
“
Because of your unbelief,” then He illuminated His answer, “
For 
verily I say unto you, If ye have faith as a grain of mustard seed,
ye shall say unto this mountain, Remove hence to yonder place;
and it shall remove ;
and nothing shall be impossible unto you.”

Our Lord was illustrating the meaning of His declaration thatunbelief was the reason of their failure. He took a seed, a grain ofmustard. The word there is simple, primary. T.he
word seed alwaysimplies that which contains the life principle. If your faith is of thenature of that seed,
then things follow, Our Lord had used the same 
figure in an earlier parable in the thirteenth chapter. He was tellingthe disciples here that their failure was due to the quality of theirfaith, their unbelief. 

In the Revised rendering here, “
because of your little faith,” theword little does not refer to quantity. When the disciples said onanother occasion, “
Lord, increase our faith,” it was not an increasein quantity, but a change of quality they sought. And the faith that 
removes mountains is like a seed which has in it the element of life,
which means growth, dynamic. In Nature the ultimate result of the 
life principle in a seed comes through death. A grain of wheat must 
fall into the ground and die. So it bears much fruit ;
and if it die,
the life principle begins to appear, through death.

When then is the secret of our failure ?
Our faith is of a failing,
faltering quality. It lacks the principle of life. Applied to the wholesituation, we see where they failed. This incident followed uponCzsarea 
Philippi, and Peter’s confession, and his fear of the Cross.
But yesterday our Lord was talking about life, the life of the Church,
and its coming glories. They had naturally been exalted and filled withjoy. But when He told them of that final and ultimate victory, thatHe must die, their faith failed. It was not of that living nature thatcould grasp His teaching. They could not interpret it, and consequently 
they were paralysed in the presence of the demon. They hadfailed at Cresarea
in confidence, in faith. Their faith lacked the principle 
of life. They failed now in the presence of their own work whichHe had commissioned them to do, and which they had done until thishour. 

Follow out the application. The quality of faith is life, faith asa grain of mustard seed. This does not mean that if we have a big 

A PARABLE AND PARABOLIC ILLUSTRATIONS gI
enough faith we can go out and say to a mountain, Move, and go 

into the sea. A living faith never seeks to do anything without having 

first ascertained that it is the will of God. If we go*
to a mountain, 

because we want to see an upheaval, and see the mountain go into 

the sea, we can talk about our faith as long as we like, and sing about 

it, but the mountain will stand fast. But if, peradventure, the thing 

should be that the actual material mountain in the will of God needed 

to be removed, and we knew it, then nothing is impossible. Living 

faith fastening upon the will of God, submissive to His will, and seeking 

nothing out of harmony therewith, becomes part of the Divine dynamic, 

and no mountains can stand against it. That was the subject illustrated, 

and that was the mighty illustration. 

We come next to the subject of the lost sheep, and the quest for it. 

What was our Lord illustrating ?
He used this parabolic illustration 

of a man who lost a sheep and sought it. He used it again later, 

when He Iinked
it with the lost drachma and the lost son, as recorded 

by Luke. Here it stands alone. What was He illustrating ?
The 

subject illustrated was finally that of offences, which might be com
mitted against little ones. Here He was limited in His teaching, 

but not in the essential appearance. 

This all grew out of a question that the disciples had asked concern
ing greatness. Jesus had taken a child, and set him in the midst as 

the type of greatness in His Kingdom ;
and when He used this illustra
tion of the lost sheep, He showed the value of that child. The illustra
tion is a familiar one, and needs no elaboration. A shepherd had lost 

a sheep, and went out after it, and found it. 

This is applied to the child. It occurs in that chapter of rarebeauty, which is pre-eminently the chapter of the child. The illustration 
came out of their passion for greatness. Jesus made their enquiry 
the reason for things He said about the child, in their bearing upon 
the disciples, and their quest for greatness. 

He told them first of all
that the child was the type of character 
in His Kingdom. Except they were turned back again from their 
manhood with its prejudices and pride, and became plastic and simpleand emptied of all pride as a child, they could not enter
into His 
Kingdom. 

The teaching is amazing and wonderful. The little child is the gatekeeper, 
and we cannot pass into His Kingdom, save as we come by 
the way of the child. He was showing them this, and in words that 
are terrible He charged them not to cause that child to stumble. He 
declared that we had no right to despise a little child, and summarized 
everything by saying it was not the will of our Father that one 
of these little ones should perish. Notice what a revelation He gave 
in the context, of the value of the child by the eternal standards. 
Angels, the Son, and the Father, are committed to them. Their 
angels always behold the face of the Father. They have constant 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

access to God on their behalf. The Son Who is the good Shepherd, is 

seeking them ;
and the Father doth not will that one of them should 

perish. 

It is a wonderful illustration that of the Shepherd, and the Shepherd 

heart, and the compassion of the Shepherd, that goes out from the 

field where the ninety and nine are safely gathered, into the desert
and the wilderness, and brings back the child. To make that applica
tion of it which is scriptural is to cut across anaemic
theology to-day 

which tells us that the children do not need saving. Such theology 

forgets the truth declared in the Bible, and illustrated in all human 

experience that we go astray from the womb, that we were born in 

sin, and shapen in iniquity. The Shepherd is seeking every one. 

“
Then on each He setteth 
His own secret sign.” 

It is the picture of the love of God, operating through His Son as 
Shepherd, caring for the little ones. Some expositors try to explain 
this by saying the little ones means believers. Not at all. The child 
was in the midst, and His eyes and heart were upon it ;
and He saw 
how His disciples were likely to be hindered in work for the children 
by self-seeking and pride and desire for place. He kept the child in 
front of Him, and told His disciples what to think of it, under this 
figure of the Shepherd. 

We pass next to that which we describe as a parable in itself, that 
of the two debtors, What was the subject He was illustrating by this 
story ?
Forgiveness, not God’s forgiveness, although that is the background 
by suggestion, but forgiveness among themselves. This cameout of Peter’s enquiry, although the enquiry was due to something 
which our Lord had been saying. There came a moment when Peter 
was overwhelmed with a wave of generosity. “
Lord, how oft shall 
my brother sin against me, and I forgive him ? until seven times ?
”
How many times have we forgiven that man who had wronged us ?
We think even to-day we have risen to the ultimate height of generous 
action when we have forgiven a man three times. We have heard 
this said, “
I forgave you once, twice, but the third time pays for all !
”
Peter doubled up, plus one, on our generosity when he said seven 
times. Oh blessed Peter, warm-hearted blundering Peter. But Jesus 
laughed at him with a fine satire, tender and cleansing, as the flashing 
of the summer lightning. Seven times ?
Supposing you try4go
!
“
I say not unto thee, Until seven times ;
but, until seventy timesseven.” We shall have to live a long time before we have any chanceof forgiving a man 490
times, seventy times seven. 

This wonderful parable consists of a contrast of attitude and 
activity towards debt. One owed his master, his lord, through his 
own fraudulent activity. T:,rs
is a purely Eastern scene. He owed 
his lord ten thousand talents. That does not mean very much to us 

PARABOLIC ILLUSTRATIONS 

here, until we become mathematical. If it were ten thousand talents 

of gold, it is beyond computation. If it was a reference to a currency

of silver, the thousand talents of silver was worth two million sterling.

If he owed his lord ten million sterling then here is a picture almost

unbelievable, and yet thoroughly Eastern. The lord ordered him to

be sold, his wife and children, and all that he had, and payment to be

made, as far as he could. The man fell down before him, casting

himself upon the mercy of his lord ;
and his lord forgave him all the

debt, cancelled it, wiped it out.

Then that man so forgiven, went out and found a man who owedhim something. That can be computed in pounds, The amount wasL5.
He had owed two million ;
the man owed him j55.
He said, “
Paythat thou owest.” The man said, Give me time ;
and he would not,
but took him by the throat, and cast him into prison. There was such 
an inherent sense of rightness in his fellow servants that they reportedthe case to their lord. His lord summoned him back, and the end of itall was that he was wroth with him. The compassion that had beenshown to him had been violated by the activity of the man to whomhe had showed that compassion ;
and he delivered him to the tormentors 
until he should pay all that was due. We may say, that was very hard.
Wait a minute. “
So shall also My heavenly Father do unto you, ifye forgive not every one his brother from your hearts.”

How many times shall I forgive my brother ?
Seven times ? 
Seventy times seven, qgo
!
Do
not forget that. Your brother owesyou not more than i5,
and you owe all of two million, which you can 
never pay. But God in His compassion forgives you everything ;
and 
if you go out to exact the last farthing
from your brother, then Godhas no forgiveness for you. His wrath will fall upon you. Hiscompassions 
are violated by your inability to be compassionate, and willbring down His wrath upon you.

Notice how the compassion of God shines behind the whole of this.
Forgiveness, not because of any worth in the man making his appeal,
not because of any worth in the sinner to forgiveness, but intended toproduce in the heart of that man a spirit like the Spirit of God. Inthat light therefore we see the baseness of the failure of the servant.
Forgiveness ? Who is it that we have in our mind ?
Have we forgiven?
How many times ?
19. Parabolic Illustrations 
Matthew xix :
12,
24 

HE TWELFTH verse of this chapter contains a remarkable parabolicTillustration. Immediately before uttering this, our Lord had said,
“
All men cannot receive this saying, but they to whom it is given.” 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

Then at the close of the twelfth verse He said, ”
He that is able to 

receive it, let him receive it.” Those words of our Lord show the 

difficulty of the illustration, and of the subject illustrated. It does 

show, however, that the intention of our Master was to reach, not the 

general crowd, but a limited company, such as were able to receive it. 

The word at the end of verse eleven, ‘
All men cannot receive this 

saying, but they to whom it is given,” did not refer to His own saying, 

but to the statement of the disciples. They had said to Him, “
If the 

case is so with his wife, it is not expedient to marry.” In the last 

clause, His statement linked up with what the disciples had suggested, 

applying to what He Himself had said, ‘
He that is able to receive it, 

let him receive it.” We see then that this parabolic illustration 

contained in these words of Jesus, seem to guard it, to fence it off, to 

show that it was not intended for everyone ;
and therefore had a 

particular and limited application. 

That being admitted, we ask, what was the subject under discussion 
?
What subject was our Lord illustrating at this point ?
To putit first quite bluntly, the subject was that of celibacy, of abstention 
from the marriage relationship. The subject under discussion wasconsequent upon previous happenings. The question of divorce had 
arisen. In order to understand our Lord’s teaching, definite, and 
applicable to all time ;
it is nevertheless necessary to remind ourselves 
of the conditions obtaining in all the Jewish world at that time, and 
opinion held then on the subject of divorce. 

It was one of prevalent and almost bitter controversy between 
two great theological schools within Judaism, Hillel, that great 
teacher who had passed on twenty years before our Lord began Hisministry, but whose opinion was widespread and tremendous, interpreting 
the finding of Moses in Deuteronomy (xxiv. I), had declared 
that the meaning was this :
“
A man may lawfully divorce his wife 
for any reason that might render her distasteful to him.” He was 
interpreting the law that if a man, after marrying, found some blemish, 
he had the right to write the wife a bill of divorcement, and send her 
home. It is a long time since HilIel
died, but men are trying to bring 
this up again to-day !
On the other hand, stood the theological school 
of Shammai, that declared there was only one reason for divorce, and 
that was unchastity. 

Those two schools were bitterly opposed, and when they came to 
Jesus with the question, it was the result of that widespread difference 
of opinion and dispute. The Pharisees came to Him, ”
tempting Him,
and saying, Is it lawful for a man to put away his wife for every 
cause ?
”
We see at once what lay behind the question.

Notice carefully our Lord’s answer to that question. Both teachers, 
Hillel and Shammai, appealed to Moses as final interpreter, but 
differently. When they came to Jesus He said, “
Have ye not read, 
that He which made them from the beginning, made
them male and 

PARABOLIC ILLUSTRATIONS 
female, and said, For this cause shall a man leave his father and mother, 
and shall cleave to his wife.” Any detailed examination of the passage 
is unnecessary ;
but they raised the question, with all
the background 
of theological controversy. He went from Hillel and Shammai, 
beyond Moses, to God. He took the whole question back into the 
region of original Divine purpose and Divine intention. That was the 
first line of His answer. 

Then He clearly declared that there was one reason for divorce, 
and only one ;
and that, to use the word of our translation, was 
“ 
fornication.” Thus He really set the seal upon Shammai’s view, 
rather than upon Hillel’s. He went on, and interpreted that. It was 
at that point the disciples showed they had been under the influence of 
Hillel in their thinking. Divorce had become simple, and cheap, and 
easy ;
and any man whose wife was distasteful to him couId
obtain a 
divorce. So they said to Jesus, If that is the standard, it were better 
for a man not to marry. It is rather a revelation of degradation in 
their thinking. They were Christ’s men now, but they still had very 
much to learn and understand. 

Then came our Lord’s remarkable reply. He admitted the possible 
accuracy of their view. He said, “
All men cannot receive this saying, 
but they to whom it is given.” As though our Lord said, You may 
be right in the presence of existing conditions, and of the original 
Divine intention, and of this strong law of chastity that permits divorce 
only for the reason of fornication. If you are right, it is a hard saying, 
and it may be so. All men cannot receive it, but they to whom it is 
given. It may be possible, in view of existing conditions, that there 
are those who take that position. Christ was not condemning them.

Then He gave them this parabolic illustration. It is purely Eastern, 
and in that way we must understand it. The word eunuch meant 
guardian of the bedchamber. The peculiarity was that these men hadto be unmarried men, and unmarriageable men. Our Lord was looking 
at the conditions, and said, There are those who are eunuchs from their 
birth. There are those who have been rendered impotent by the act of 
man. But beyond these two facts then in existence He saw another. 
There are those who have taken up this position of celibacy from the 
marriage relationship in the interest of the Kingdom of God. “
He 
that is able to receive it, let him receive it.” Some are born incapable 
of marriage. Some are created incapable to marry. With them we 
have nothing to do. We are not living in the East. Then some for 
the Kingdom of heaven’s sake take up the position of celibacy. Our 
Lord said that was not for everyone. Some men cannot receive this, 
but He recognized the possibility. He said, “
He that is able to receive 
it, let him receive it.” In other words He taught distinctly that in 
the interest of the Kingdom of heaven, celibacy is permitted, but it is 
not enjoined. There can be no command laid upon a man that he 
become celibate, if he is to serve the Kingdom of heaven ;
but if any 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

man out of soul conviction, separates himself from the marriage

relationship, so be it, let it be. There is nothing forbidding it ;
there 

is nothing to enjoin it, nothing to command it.

That little paragraph stands there, fenced off by the words of Jesus,

showing that what is said is not easy to be received, and was only

for those who were able to receive it. That does not mean that those 

able to receive it are lifted on to a higher plane than those not so

able ;
but it does mean that those not able to receive it are not to hold 

in contempt anyone who devotes himself or herself to the celibate

life, in the interests of the Kingdom of God. It must be a matter of 

personal conscience and relationship for those who are able to receive it.

Then we look down the ages, and look around. How often we have 
known those who have been able to receive this thing, and haverendered service to the Kingdom of God of a most remarkable kind,
because they have been able to receive it. I do not know that it would 
be historically safe to quote the case of Paul, because in Farrar’s Life
of St. Pad he argues at length that Paul was a married man. He did 
say, “
Have we no right to lead about a wife ?
”
Yet taking thecontext we see that he said, speaking to the unmarried, “
It is good forthem if they abide even as I am.” In all probability he used it as anillustration of the celibate life. Do not forget, if any incline to theRoman view, that the one who is claimed as the rock of the Churchwas not a celibate. That does not invalidate either Peter’s or Paul’s 
power. There, however, the great principle is presented to us.

There is another principle at the heart of it, applicable over a wider 
area. In the last analysis the attitude and action of every individualsoul must be personal and individual, and in the presence of God.
So the light shines over a wider field than evinced in the realm thatour Lord referred to by His use of the figure.

WC pass on to another
quite different figure of speech
found in 
verse twenty-four. “ 
It is easier for a camel to go through a needle’s 
eye, 
than for a rich man to‘cntcr into the Kingdom of God.” Much 
more should be rcacl
and referred to. Our Lord was now illustratingthe blighting influence of wealth on personality. Look at the previous 
verse. “ 
It is hard for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of heaven.”
That was the subject under discussion at the moment. The discipleswere astonished, for they said, “
Who then can be saved ?
”
The 
subject emphasized was the possible blighting influence of wealth onpersonality, not inevitably so, nor finally necessary.

The whole subject arose out of the departure of the young ruler.
It was then that our Lord said, “
How hardly shall they that haveriches enter into the Kingdom of God.” He did not say they cannotdo SO. Indeed, presently we shall see that they can. He did not sayit was impossible, but that it was hard and difficult. The emphasis ofthe declaration might have been seen if it had been immediatelyuttered, as the disciples looked at the retreating back of the young 

PARABOLIC ILLUSTRATIONS 

ruler ; as he had turned his back upon the revelation Christ had 
brought to him, because he was one “ 
that had great possessions.” 
How hard it is for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of heaven. 
Our Lord’s comment emphasizes in the most superlative way, and 
almost terrifying degree, the statement He had just made. 

But there is something else to be added. Take the illustration as 
it stands. “ 
It is easier for a camel to go through a needle’s eye, than 
for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of God.” We may say, of 
course that means, it is impossible. Yes, in a certain sense, and our 
Lord meant to teach that. There is no need to go fully into the matter 
of the word camel, or eye, or needle. There have been many attempts 
to explain this passage by explaining it away ;
that our Lord did not 
really mean what He said, if He used the actual words. Some of the 
Cursives
there give Kamilos,
which means rope, instead of a camel. 
Hort says that was “ 
certainly wrong,” and Robertson has ratified 
Hort’s finding. They are both right. Lord Nugent said in his Lands 
Classical and Sacred that the needle’s eye referred to a gate with the 
smaller arch, through which no camel could pass except unladen. That 
is possible, most possible. However, to me it is unnatural, forced, 
and insufficient. I believe our Lord meant and said exactly this, If a 
camel cannot go through a needle’s eye, neither can a rich man enter 
into the Kingdom of God. 

A friend of mine in the States, a man, a scientist of unusual ability, 
once delivered one of the most remarkable addresses I have heard, 
fanciful, but scientifically clever, on this text. He showed it was quite 
possible to put a camel through a needle’s eye. He took a camel,
dissected it, analysed it, and reduced it to its elements, down to a 
liquid, and so was able to squirt it through a needle’s eye. I apologize 
to my distant friend for the blunt way of stating this !
I do not know 
that I am prepared to accept it. Yet there is something here that is 
of great importance. The saying of our Lord here meant that a rich 
man is rendered incapable by his own action of entering into the 
Kingdom of God. 

The disciples then said, “
Who then can be saved 1 
“-another 
revelation of their mental outlook and attitude. We saw it in their 
question on divorce. What lurked behind it ?
Rich men could not 
enter into the Kingdom, because they evidently believed in the power 
of wealth to introduce men everywhere. If a rich man cannot go, no 
man can. We see their faulty thinking. Perhaps they were hoping 
some wealthy man would join the movement. “
Who then can be 
saved ?
”
As on another occasion they came to Jesus with astonishment, 
and said, All men are seeking Thee. They were always thinking 
on a faulty level. He had almost as much trouble with them as He 
has to do to train us. We are so slow, fools, and slow of heart to 
believe. That is the background here, 

Mark the tremendous significance of what our Lord said. He 

7 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

replied to them, saying, “looking upon them, With men this is im
possible ; 
but with God all things are possible.” Everything depends 

upon the preposition employed there. “ 
With men,” #at-a,
by the side 

of, in the company of. “ 
With God,” para,
by the side of, in the com
pany of, in fellowship with. “ 
With men it is impossible.” With a 

rich man hampered by his riches, overwhelmed by them, mastered by 

them, depending upon them, imagining with the disciples that they 

constitute some right of entrance into any possession of privilege, it 

cannot be done, said Jesus. With men, not by men. If a man is only 

looking out upon the level of his fellows, if only acting with men, if 

his thinking is mastered by human views, and he is struggling under 

the mastery and co-operation with others to enter the Kingdom of God, 

it cannot be done, it is impossible. But with God nothing is impossible. 

All things are possible if that man ceases to look to himself as a human 

being, or to his fellows in association with him, trying to find entrance, 

if he cuts himself off from them, and comes into definite contact with 

God, if he begins by submission to God, and continues in fellowship 

with God. Nothing is impossible to that man
This all
began with the coming of the young ruler. Do not forget 
our Lord looked upon him with great affection. Mark tells us that 
“ 
Jesus, looking upon him, loved him.” That was after he had declared 
he had kept all the commandments on the second Table of the Decalogue
from his youth up. He had come asking what he should do to 
inherit eternal life, this man with great possessions. Jesus had told 
him, “ 
Thou knowest the commandments,” and in quick succession 
had flashed upon him in brief wording, the essential light of the six 
commandments that marked the interrelationship between man and 
man. Man with man. He had said, “
All these have I kept from my 
youth up.” Do not say he was lying. He was not. He told the truth. 
Looking at Jesus he said he had a clean record by the test of the law, 
the commandments that marked relationship with his fellow-men, 
” 
with men.” But he was outside the Kingdom. 

Then Christ said to him, “
One thing thou lackest, go, sell all that 
thou hast, 
and give to the poor.” That is initial, preliminary, “
And 
come, follow Me.” Who was speaking ? The One Whom the young 
ruler had addressed as “
Good Master ”
;
and when He said that, Jesus 
said to him, “
Why callest
thou Me good ? There is one good, that is 
God.” We are shut up to an alternative. Jesus meant, either, I am 
not good, or He meant, I am God. We do not accept the view that He 
meant, I am not good. One thing lacking, that is life. One thing thou 
lackest, follow Me, follow the One Who stands before you in the place 
of God, and then all things are possible. You can enter into life. 
You can find your way into the Kingdom of God. 

The case in question was that of a wealthy man. The final application 
of Jesus is to far more than the wealthy men. It is to every man 
whether rich or poor the truth abides. “ 
With men,” if our thinking 

THE LABOURERS
IN THE VINEYARD 

is mastered by human opinion or action, in seeking human co-operation;
if endeavour is halted within the paralysis of our own human nature,
we cannot struggle our way into the Kingdom of God. But if on the 
other hand we are “ 
with God,” all things are possible, even the passingthrough the needle’s eye of the camel. 

20. The Labourers
in the Vineyard 
Matthew xx :
1-16
T
T
HE FIRST sixteen verses of this chapter contain the parable of thelabourers in the vineyard. We ask, What was the subject ourLord intended to illustrate when He made use of this parable ?
To 
take the parable out of its context and study it alone is impossible.
John Ruskin
went hopelessly wrong when he wrote “ 
Unto this last,”
and thought he was interpreting the parable, which he did not understand. 
Observe first the boundaries of the parable. The final verse of the 
nineteenth chapter reads, “
But many shall be last that are first ;
and 
first that are last.” The sixteenth verse of chapter twenty reads,
“ 
So the last shall be first, and the first last.” In the first verse we 
have the dictum of Jesus, and in the second, an interpretation of thedictum. The great dictum is uttered, ”
Many shall be last that arefirst
; 
and first that are last.” The parable is given in illuminationand illustration ;
and then our Lord gathered everything up and said,
“ 
So,” in that way, “ 
the last shall be first, and the first last.” Those 
are the boundaries. 

We go a little farther back and ask, What was the particularoccasion of this dictum of Jesus ?
What made Him say, ‘
Many shallbe last that are first ;
and first that are last ? ”
That came as the 
result of an answer to an enquiry raised by Peter. How thankful we 
are for Peter, and all his questions. In verse twenty-seven, “
Then 
answered Peter and said unto Him, Lo, we have left all, and followedThee ;
what then shall we have ?
”
It was because of that questionour Lord uttered this dictum, and it was because of that dictum,
resulting from that question, that our Lord gave this parable.

So again we must go back a little farther, to the story of the youngruler, to whom Jesus had said, “
Go, sell that thou hast, and give to the 
poor, ... and, come, follow Me.” He had turned his back, and goneaway sorrowful. The man who had great possessions, a clean record,
a fine temperament, stood confronting Jesus, and heard that word,
that he lacked control external to himself. Jesus called him to submit 
himself to Him, but he went away. He clung to his possessions ;
and 
Jesus interpreted that as we saw in our previous study, ”
It is hard for 

100 PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of heaven. .. .
It is easier for a 

camel to go through the needle’s eye, than for a rich man to enter into

the Kingdom of God.” Peter now said, “
Lo, we have left all, and

followed Thee ;
what then shall we have ? ”
What is to be the gain

of this renunciation, after we have done it ?
As though he had said,

Master, Thou hast called the man to a great renunciation. He has

turned his back, and gone away. “
We have left all, and followed

Thee.” What is the use of it ?
What shall we gain?
The Lord gave him a wonderful answer to that question :
“
Verily I

say unto you, that ye which have followed Me, in the regeneration,

when the Son of man shall sit on the throne of His glory .
.
.
He was 

looking on to something in the future, and telling them what they

would gain in that future order that should be set up. They would

gain authority as His administrators in that Kingdom ;
and not only

so, but “
everyone that hath left houses, or brethren, or sisters, or

father, or mother, or children, or lands, for My name’s sake, shall

receive a hundredfold, and shall inherit eternal life.” It is a very

wonderful answer, that of Jesus. They would gain authority, friend
ship, eternal life ;
but do not forget that “
many shall be last that

are first ;
and first that are last.” 

So the Lord first answered that question of Peter’s, and thenuttered that word of warning. The parable is the illumination of theword of warning. Literally He said, ”
Many shall be last first, andfirst last.” The words that are are in italics and are not in the text,
“
The last first, and first last.”

What then is the subject He was illustrating ? Service, and itsreward. The teaching of this parable is applicable only to the disciplesof Jesus, with regard to their service.

What is the figure ?
First, a man who is a householder, and whohas a vineyard. It is his vineyard, his property. Notice carefully thatthe picture the Lord draws here is of a man with a vineyard, his 
property ;
and he hired labourers to do his work in his vineyard.
It is interesting here that the Lord took a day, twelve hours. “
Are 
there not twelve hours in the day ?
”
Here they are. He went outearly, at the third, the sixth, the ninth, and eleventh hours. The 
owner, the master, went out and hired labourers at these intervals duringthe passing day. They were all called by the Master. There is no word 
in this parable of men asking for work. The labourers were not seekingwork. They were outside the vineyard ;
but he called them inside, andset them to work ;
and they all came in, whep
he called them. Manywere called early. They went in and worked. At the third hour theywent in, and at the sixth, and ninth, and eleventh hours, when hecalled them. It is an Eastern picture of a householder, a vineyard,
and work to be done in a vineyard. He went out, and the labourerswent in to work, when they were called. They did not ask to go. Theyagreed for a penny. It was a bargain. It was a contract. Then the day 

THE LABOURERS IN THE VINEYARD 

closed after the eleventh hour, and the last hired did one hour’s work 

only. Having agreed with the first, he paid the workers according 

to the agreement. We are not told he made any agreement with the 

rest, but he paid them according to his own will. He gave every 

man a penny only, to those last who worked only one hour he also 

gave a penny. 

We can understand the murmuring ;
but if we also are inclined to 

murmur at the story, it is because we have not yet caught the real 

significance of the parable, or what Jesus was intending to teach. 

First of all the master dealt with the last men as unto the first. The 

first “
supposed that they would receive more, and they likewise re
ceived every man a penny.” We agree that a bargain is to be kept, a 

contract is sacred. If you agree with me for a penny ;
if justice is 

done, have you any right to object to my generosity ?
Has not this 

man a right to do what he wills with his own ?
That is the only question 

that arises, as to whether this householder had a right to do what he 

liked with his own. The implication of the question of Jesus was that 

he had such right. 

Yet the teaching of the parable shows that the right is invested 

in something else. So we come to that teaching. It must be found in 

the strict limits of the context. There is no question of salvation here. 

It is wholly one of service. Moreover, these men were no lazy loiterers. 

They all entered the vineyard when they were called ;
and that is 

specially emphasized in the case of the last called. 

Other parabIes
have other aspects of service. T&re
is the parable 
of the Pounds, and that of the Talents. In our thinking we often 
confuse these. The Labourers, the Pounds, and the Talents all have to 
do with different aspects of service. In the parable of the Pounds, 
every man received a pound, and our Lord was showing common 
opportunity, created by a deposit received. In the parable of the 
Talents, He was showing how varying gifts create responsibility. 
What then was He teaching here I
That payment is according to 
fidelity to opportunity. 

That covers the whole ground. That is the whole meaning of the 
parable. That felIow
who went in at the eleventh hour never had 
a chance before. He was not called ;
but when sent, he went in, and 
was paid on the basis of the fact that for one hour he was faithful. 
The man who went in early, and served through all the burden and 
heat of the day was faithful to his work. The parable therefore illustrated 
the payment of reward to fidelity of opportunity. It does not 
mean that if a man has his opportunity, and does not take it, and 
wastes the fleeting hours, he will get the same reward as the man 
who has toiled through all the livelong
day. Our Lord was simply 
emphasizing this one matter, fidelity to opportunity. 

I wonder if we have really grasped that yet. What opportunity 
has God given you ?
I do not know. I am not asking for any answer, 

102 PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

except in your own soul. He gave to D. L. Moody the opportunity 
of a waiting nation, of two nations, and when his day’s work was done, 
he had his penny, because he was gloriously faithful to his opportunity. 
There is a woman somewhere among the hills and mountains, 
poor, struggling, striving, but she has two children, and she puts her 
life into the business of training them for God. We do not know her. 
We never heard of her, not even in the columns of the religious press, 
but she has gone. Her children have grown up ;
she has gone on. She 
got her penny !
The penny is nothing. Our Lord took a denarius, a 
trivial amount even for labour,
to emphasize the similarity of reward, 
on the basis of fidelity to opportunity. 

Now then, ‘ 
Many are called, but few are chosen.” These words 
are omitted from the Revised Version both in the English and American 
revisions. It is wholly a matter of MSS. If we retain them, we should 
not read ”
chosen ”
there, but “ 
choice,” which word carries the 
idea far better. “ 
Many are called, but few choice.” These men were 
all called, and according to the parable they went and did their work, 
and got their penny. Said Christ, Yes, there are many called, but they 
are not worth their salt, they are not choice ;
they will not get their 
penny. “ 
Many are called, but few are choice.” 

Has He called us into the vineyard 1
Well, if He has, we have 
only one thing that ought to fill
our souls with Divine anxiety. That 
is that we do the job He gives us, and according to our fidelity will 
be our reward. 

21.
The Cursing of the Fig- tree 
Matthew xxi :
18-22 

IN THE chronological sequence of the life of Jesus we now reach a 
new realm in His teaching and work. This incident of the cursing 
of the fig-tree, and the remainder of the parables and parabolic illustrations 
in Matthew, were uttered in the last days of His life on earth. 
He had now arrived in Jerusalem for the final scenes, and it is 
important that we recognize at the beginning that His teaching was 
largely denunciatory, and His actions administrative. By this time 
His teaching to the crowd and the multitudes generally was over. 
Presently He would gather His own disciples around Him, and give 
them His final teaching. His actions now were administrative, the 
actions of a full and supreme authority.
What we celebrate and call Palm Sunday, and speak of as the 
triumphal entry of Jesus to Jerusalem, was really a threefold entry on 
three separate days. Mark tells the story of His first coming. It was 
on a Sabbath day when He entered the Temple, and looked round 

THE CURSING OF THE FIG-TREE 
about upon all things, and said nothing. He turned His back, and 
went out. On the next day, our Sunday, the first day of the week inthe Jewish calendar, He came again, and cleansed the Temple. When 
He first entered the traffickers were not there. It was the Sabbath. 
They had taken their places again on the next day, when He cleansedthe Temple. Then on the Monday, their second day of the week, Hecame again, and that was the great and dramatic day of controversywith the rulers. That word is used with care and determination. It 
was a dramatic day. There is nothing in the life of our Lord comparableto it in certain respects. It was a day in which He, though rejected bythe rulers, chief priests, scribes, and Pharisees, nevertheless enteredthe city and the Temple, gathered those men about Him, and compelledthem to find verdicts on their own condition, and pass sentences ontheir own failure. That is a summary of events, details of which wecome to in the parabolic illustrations. In these days this cursing ofthe fig-tree occurred, which was unquestionably a parabolic act, andconcerning which our Lord gave an interpretation. The whole paragraph 
must be taken in its entirety, against its background, to understand 
the things I have referred to as existing.

We see at the beginning of the chapter how Jesus had now comeup to Jerusalem for the official rejection of the Hebrew people ;
not 
their rejection of Him, but His rejection of them. If we study carefullythat story of the threefold entry, we shall find He entered in everyaspect of authority. He entered as the King, as Prophet, as Priest.
All through the story we see the august and splendid and gloriousdignity of Jesus. Oh, yes, His enemies were there in their robes andtheir phylacteries,
all opposed to Him ;
but He moved with majestyinto the midst of them, and dealt with them until there fell from His 
lips that final sentence addressed to the nation through the rulers,
”
The Kingdom of God shall be taken away from you, and shall begiven to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof.” That nation was 
then rejected from the office it had held for the interpretation andrevelation of the meaning of the Kingdom of God. They were rejected,
and the Kingdom was taken from them, because they had failed tobring forth fruit. The Kingdom of God was taken from them, andgiven to a nation that should bring forth the fruits of that Kingdom.

After the entry on that first day, and the cleansing of the Templeon the second day, having spent the night in Bethany,
He returned 
to Jerusalem, and on the way He destroyed the fig-tree.

This action had created difficulty in the minds of many. Oneis almost amused at the way some people seem to be puzzled. The 
rank and file seem to understand it better than the expositors. Goingover expository literature it is interesting to find what difficulty hasbeen created. We must bear in mind this is the only miracle of judgment 
that Jesus wrought. We may say, What about the destructionof the swine, when they swept down the steep place into the sea? 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

Yes, that is certainly true, but in the case of the Gadarene swine, the 
objective was not judgment, but the delivery of a man. There was 
judgment incidentally. But this was a case in which Jesus, passing 
along, exhibited His power to destroy, not to save ;
and it is the only 
case on record. There can be no doubt whatever that it was a parabolic 
action, especially if we put ourselves back into the mental mood of the 
disciples who were with Him ;
and with all reverence, into His own 
mental mood. When He destroyed that fig-tree, there were wider 
meanings in the action than the mere destruction of the tree. 

Let us look at the story a little carefully in two ways, first facing 
these difficulties, and then enquiring what were the immediate and 
permanent values of this action of Jesus, according to His own interpretation 
of it to His disciples. 

Three difficulties have been suggested. First, that His action in 
destroying that tree was an act of injustice. Mark tells us, “
It was 
not the season of figs.” People have fastened upon that, and have said 
if it was not the season of figs, it was an act of injustice to destroy the 
tree, because no figs were on it. 

Then it has been objected that it was an angry action, because He 
was hungry. He was hungry, and no figs were there ;
and so in anger 
He smote the tree with His power, and destroyed it. It is interesting 
to see people think that was wrong. One wonders where they learned 
it was wrong, if they did not know Jesus !
The very objection grows 
out of a consciousness of the mind and the heart of Jesus. Still there 
is the objection which has been definitely raised. 

The third objection is that it is not in harmony with His methods 
as they have been revealed.

We need not tarry with these objections. First of alI,
the charge 
that it was an act of injustice. What are the facts about these fig-
trees ? The usual time of figs there in the East was certainly June, 
and I think we can say, without any argument, this cursing happened 
in the month of April ;
so
Mark says it was not the time of figs, not 
the time of the full usual harvest of figs. But there was a kind of first 
ripe fig, before the time of figs, often found on certain fig-trees. In the 
prophecy of Isaiah, in the course of the twenty-eighth chapter, describing 
the desolation that is coming, he said, “
The crown of the pride of 
the drunkards of Ephraim shall be trodden under foot ;
and the fading 
flower of his glorious beauty, which is on the head of the fat valley, 
shall be as the first ripe fig before the summer ;
which when he looketh 
upon it seeth, while it is yet in his hand he eateth it up.” That is an 
allusion to a fact of Nature, with which all dwellers in that land were 
familiar. On certain fig-trees ripe figs were found before the summer, 
which was the time of figs ;
and whenever figs were so found, it was 
before the leaves appeared, when the trees were just burgeoning out. 
The figs were found growing on the stems and on the branches, before 
the leaves came. 

THE CURSING OF THE FIG-TREE 

But when Jesus came to this fig-tree, He found nothing but leaves.
There should have been no leaves at all. It was a false development,
so there were leaves, but no fruit. It was a tree of false development.
The leaves suggested its fruitfulness, but no fruit was there. Therethe tree grew by the wayside as they travelled along. Jesus, beinghungry, came up to it, and looked at it. Leaves were on the tree before 
the time, but no fruit ;
a false development of show and appearance,
with no reality of fruitfulness. It was upon that condition that ourLord based His word, “
Let there be no fruit from thee henceforward 
for ever ”
;
and at the word of authority, the tree immediately witheredaway. So much for the charge of injustice. It was the cursing anddestruction of a tree that had failed. 

What about this suggestion of anger ?
There is not a sign ofpersonal vindictiveness in the whole story. Notice carefully a simplematter, but it is important. The disciples were not surprised at theeffect produced upon that tree. They were surprised at the quickness,
the suddenness of it. That is what amazed them. There was no 
suggestion on their part that such a tree should be destroyed ;
but 
that with the spoken word, the leaves withered and crumpled, and thetree was dead. That is what amazed them, the speed with which itwas carried out. There is no suggestiveness of the vindictivenessof Jesus, but the astonishment of the disciples. The tree was 
faulty, a failure ;
but they were surprised at the swiftness of thejudgment.

Again we are told that the action of destroying that tree was notaccording to the methods of Jesus. Let us think again before we saythat. So many people have the idea that our Lord is known only asthe meek and lowly Jesus. He was meek. He said so. He was lowly.
He claimed to be so. But He was infinitely more. He was majesticwith a majesty that appals us the nearer we get to Him, and Hiswrath was terrific when it blazed forth in words that at the distance 
of nearly two millenniums scorch us as we read them. We remember 
when He read Himself in, at the synagogue in Nazareth, He read,
“
The Spirit of the Lord is upon Me. .
.
.
We have all noticed 
where He stopped. He ended with the words, “
to proclaim theacceptable year of the Lord.” Then He closed the book and sat down. 
If we open the book, the Hebrew version, we are not helped very much;
but if we take our English Version, and open the book, where He stoppedthere is a comma, and nothing more. What is the next sentence ?
“
The day of vengeance of our God.” That is the whole prophecyconcerning Him. The Spirit of the Lord was upon Him to preach theacceptable year of the Lord, and the day of vengeance of our God.
To be quite technical, only a comma, but that marks a pause of atleast 1940
years. That day of vengeance has not come. It is coming.
Some of us seem to see the clouds sweeping up the sky now. It is 
coming, the day of vengeance. But in the method of Christ, there is 

106
PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

not only the acceptable year of the Lord ;
there is the day of 

vengeance.

Take another ihustration
from Matthew, where the quotation is 

made concerning Him. It is said, “
A bruised reed shall He not break, 

and smoking flax shall He not quench,” and we constantly quote that 

to show the gentleness of His method. We have no right to do so. 

Finish the quotation.

“
A bruised reed shall
He not break, and smoking flax shall He 

not quench, till He send forth judgment unto victory.” The accept
able year of the Lord is the day of His grace. The day of vengeance of 

God is the day when He will break the bruised reed, and quench the 

smoking flax. Do not think falsely about the methods of Jesus. For 

a moment,here
there flamed into the view of His disciples a retri
butive act of Jesus in the realm of the material, as He cursed that 

fig-tree. 

What did it mean ? We need to take the whole paragraph, and to 

notice first of all His condition. In the morning He returned to the 

city, and “ 
He hungered.” How do we interpret that I
He had been 

in Bethany,
which may not necessarily mean that He was in the town 

of Bethany,
but in the neighbourhood. During that last week in the 

life of our Lord, He never slept in Jerusalem. He went up there on 

successive days, but at night He left the city, and went away into 

loneliness. Martha, Mary, and Lazarus were in Bethany,
and we can 

hardly conceive of His coming back from that hospitable home hungry 

on the physical level. 

Yet I think He was hungry on the physical level, which was a 
symbol of a deeper hunger possessing Him, the hunger for the doing of 
the will of God, the hunger for the redemption of humanity ;
yes, 
let us say the drastic thing, the desire, the hunger for His Cross. 
He knew the failure of the nation, and the reason of their failure. 
He knew that they had now become apparently a fair fig-tree-to 
use the figure which was one of the symbols of the nation-but 
He knew also that upon that fig-tree leaves were flourishing, but 
fruit was absent. He was hungry, hungry for the things of God, 
hungering for the accomplishment of the Divine purpose. The 
material hunger was there, but in the perfect unity of His Personality, 
the material hunger was the sacramental symbol of thespiritual hunger. 

Then He found that fig-tree, saw its unutterable failure, and He 
cursed it, and destroyed it. He did that which was a strange thing. 
Strange ?
Yea, veriIy.
I go back once more to Isaiah to the twenty-
eighth chapter at the twenty-first verse. The prophet is still speaking 
of the judgments to fall, and he said this, “
For the Lord shall rise up 
as in mount Perazim, He shall be wroth as in the valley of Gibeon
;
that He may do His work, His strange work, and bring to pass His 
act, His strange act.” What ?
Judgment, destruction, the strange 

THE CURSING OF THE FIG-TREE 

act of God. That is something foreign to the desire and the heart of 

God. God willeth not the death of any sinner. That does not prevent 

the death of the soul that fails. “ 
His strange act.” Jesus is walking 

towards Jerusalem on one of His last journeys, and there is a false 

tree, emblem of the nation ;
and He acted in “ 
His strange act.” He 

was on His way to national judgment, which the next two parables 

will make clear. 

Look again, and notice that when this was done, the disciples 

spoke to Him, and they said, “
How did the fig-tree immediately 

wither away ?
”
Notice, not, Why didst Thou do this ?
but, What 

brought about that strange swiftness of result ?
The Lord did not answer that enquiry. He did not tell them how 

He had done it, but He did reveal why He had done it, and He did 

reveal what the principle was, that found illustration in that destructive 

act :
“
Verily, I say unto you, If ye have faith, and doubt not, ye shallnot only do what is done to the fig -tree, but even if ye shall sayunto this mountain, Be thou taken up and cast into the sea, it shallhe done. And all things, whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, believing,
ye shall receive.” 

We ask, Where is the connection ?
It is in the revelation of the 
reason of the failure of the nation. He had now passed away from 
the fig-tree. There the tree stood, withered, blighted, blasted ;
because 
it gave a false appearance which was untrue to reality. There it was, 
and while the disciples were wondering at the power that had wroughtso swift a destruction, He took them to the heart of the trouble He 
was facing. What was it ?
Why had that nation failed ? For lack 
of faith in God. He took those simple words, and yet so sublime, 
telling them that if they had faith and doubted not, it would not be a 
withered fig-tree, but a mountain in front of them, barring progress, 
which could be moved into the sea, “
All things, whatsoever ye shall 
ask in prayer, believing, ye shall receive.” 

Then He revealed the principle. Lacking faith, the nation was 
perishing, notwithstanding its outward appearance of life. Possessing 
faith, though everything seemed to be against them, they might come 
to power. The cursing of the fig-tree and the destruction was a parabolic 
and symbolic act, and our Lord interpreted it to us. 

As we consider this story, we are impressed with the absolute 
oneness of Christ with God ;
and we see His ministry of mercy merging 
into one of judgment. But that judgment is exercised in strictestjustice, vindicated by mercy. The power in which His own followers 
are to cast out the obstacles which are in the way of God’s coming 
into His Kingdom is that of faith. Men of faith co-operate with God 
and God operates through men of faith. 

108 PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

22.
Two Sons and Husbandmen 
Matthew xxi
:
28-44
HAVE seen that the parabolic miracle of the cursing of the

W
W
E 

fig-tree was judicial and denunciatory. This paragraph con
tains two parables which were uttered on the day of the third entry of

Jesus to Jerusalem. He had entered the city as the King, and had

Iooked round about on all things, and turned His back upon them. He 

had entered as Priest, and cleansed the Temple, for a brief period

restoring it to its true place in the economy of God. He now came 

as the great Prophet, with the message of God, and this time the

message was judicial. That was His purpose in coming.

These things should be stressed, because we need to be delivered

from any false thinking about the final things in the life of our Lord.

We might be apt to think, and perhaps naturally, of Him as being

hemmed in by His enemies, caught, and by them put to death. That 

is an entirely false view of the situation. Never in all human history

was anyone less hemmed in by His enemies than was Jesus.

The story beginning in this passage is a remarkable revelation ofthis. In all literature there is no more dramatic passage than this.
From the standpoint of the watching angels, and heaven’s observation,
we see a most amazing thing. He is seen coming up, gathering roundabout Him the rulers who had utterly failed in the economy of God;
and compelling them to find a verdict upon their own conduct, andto pass a sentence commensurate with the verdict they themselves hadfound. He did this by the simple method of telling them stories,
and asking their opinion on them.

He began first, “
What think ye ?
”
He told them a story, askedtheir opinion, and the opinion they gave was perfectly accurate. Then 
He told them another story, and again He asked their opinion, and theygave it, and it was quite correct. Thus, with a master hand, and bythe use of simple illustrations of parabolic nature, He reached downinto the deepest things in the lives of these men, and they pleadedguilty, and chose their own punishment, without knowing what theywere doing, until He had finished. Then they saw He was speakingabout them. 

There are two parables here, that of the two sons, and that of thehusbandmen. What was the subject illustrated in both of them ?
The 
verse preceding the parables says, “
And when He was come into the 
Temple, the chief priests and the elders of the people came unto Himas He was teaching, and said, By what authority doest Thou these 
things ?
and who gave Thee this authority?
”
That was the challenge of the rulers. Their opposition to Him 

TWO SONS AND HUSBANDMEN 

had been growing. It began at the beginning of His ministry. It had 

grown more and more intense, and things had happened on the previous 

day. He had cleansed the Temple, driven out the traffickers, inter
fered with vested interests which were permitted by these very rulers ;
and they now came to Him. This time it was not a casual question, 

asked by one of their number. It was a question asked officially. They 

asked Him two questions. What were they ? “
By what authority 

doest Thou these things ? and Who gave Thee this authority ? ”
Literally the first question was, In what authority doest Thou these 

things ?
and the second, Who gave Thee this authority ?
It was a 

direct challenge on the part of the authorities to Jesus concerning His 

authority. 

While this is not our subject, we need the background to see to 

what it led. Our Lord now asked them a question. “
I also will ask 

you one question.” They had asked Him two. “
I also will ask you 

one question, which if ye tell Me, I likewise will tell you by what 

authority I do these things. The baptism of John, whence was it ?
from heaven or from men ?
”
Look at that question. They had asked Him for His authority. 
He took them back to that mighty ministry, with the effects of which 
they were all familiar, the ministry of John. They knew as well as 
He that John’s ministry had culminated in the prediction of the 
Messiah. Vast multitudes had heard, and they had heard John as he 
had identified this very Jesus, and said, “ 
Behold, the Lamb of God.” 
Now, said Jesus, Was John’s baptism and mission authorized from 
heaven or not ?
Or was it of men ? 

They were on the horns of a dilemma. If they said, Of heaven, thentheir question about Jesus was answered. If John was right in declaring 
He was the Messiah, the authority of Jesus was from heaven, 
then why ask Jesus for His authority ? Notice what they said. They 
did not yet see the implication of the question. They began talking, 
and reasoning among themselves, saying, If we say, From heaven, He 
will say, Why do you not believe Me ?
If we say, From men, we 
fear the multitude, for all hold John a prophet. Their reasoning was 
false. They missed the point of His question. Their whole concern 
was to set themselves in a right light with general opinion. If they 
admitted the authority of John was derived from heaven, then Jesus 
would ask them why they did not believe Him. We see the contention. 
They had not believed, and they knew He would ask them why. If, 
however, they said what they wanted to say, His authority was from 
men, then they would have all the multitudes up in arms. So we 
see them halting between expediency and convenience ;
and whenever 
a man halts there, he is doomed and damned, unless he repent. 

Our Lord then gave them two parables, each based upon the song 
of Isaiah, in the fifth chapter. “
Let me sing for my wellbeloved a song 
of my beloved touching his vineyard. My wellbeloved had a vineyard 

II0
PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

in a very fruitful hill.” They all knew that song of Isaiah. They were 

all familiar with that writing, and Jesus based His two parables upon 

that old-time song, and that in a remarkable way. 

Take the first parable. The story told to them was that of two 

sons, and their opinion was asked concerning it. The story of the 

two sons, carefully considered, is seen to be the condemnation of 

their methods. The second parable, that of the husbandmen, is a 

condemnation of their motives. 

The figure employed is that of two sons, both receiving a com
mand to work in the vineyard. One said, I will not go, but afterward 

he repented, and went. The other said, as we render it, “ 
I go, Sir.” 

There is no word “
go ”
there in the Greek. It would be awkward with
out it, but really it is an emphatic “ 
I.” “ 
I, Sir.” The picture Jesus 

drew was that of two sons in front of the master of the vineyard, and 

he said to the one, Go and work in my vineyard, and he said, I will 

not go; to the other he said the same thing, and the other said, 

“ 
I, Sir.” He was putting him into contrast with the man who said 

he would not go. That was his decision. Certainly I will go, Sir. 

“ 
I, Sir.” 

We know the sequel. The man who said “ 
I will not,” repented, 
and the word means more than a change of mind. It means sorrow. 
He became sorry. He thought the matter through, and he went, and 
did his work. The other man who had emphasized it, by putting himself 
into contrast with the brother who would not go, did not go. 
Now, said Jesus, there is the story. Which of them is the true son of 
the father ?
Which of them did the will of the father ?
Oh, the first, 
they said. Oh yes, they knew, they agreed ;
and they were perfectlyright. 

Then our Lord made a remarkable application. He took them back 
to John. He had asked them about the baptism and mission of John, 
and his authority. I have asked you whether John’s ministry was 
from heaven or of men, and you have said you did not know. That 
was their final finding, “ 
We know not.” Look back and see publicans 
and sinners, the rebellious crowd, on the one hand ;
and these very 
rulers, professing allegiance to God, on the other. Two sons. The 
publicans and harlots, and the rebellious say, We will not go ;
we will 
not yield to God. The rulers say, We will yield to God. We remember 
the prayer in the Temple, 0 God, I thank Thee I am not as other 
men are, or as this publican
I
Then said Jesus, Under the preaching of John the publicans and 
harlots have repented ;
they have believed. You, the rulers, believe 
not, yet you refuse the signs of the publicans and harlots who are 
believing, and are doing the will of God. These outcasts, these 
publicans, these harlots, these rebellious ones who have defied God, 
and said they would not obey Him, have repented, and obeyed. You 
who wear the robes and livery, and recite the confession, and declare 

TWO SONS AND HUSBANDMEN II I 

your loyalty, are failing to do the will of God. So our Lord compelled 

them to find a verdict against themselves. 

How eternally true we know this to be. The publican, the drunkard, 

the harlot, the sot, the profligate who repents and turns to God, 

becomes God’s son, God’s child, God’s instrument. Those men and 

women who name the Name, and wear the sign, and are disobedient 

and rebellious in all the deep facts of their life, are not the children 

of God, are not the sons of God. 

But He had not finished. As He had condemned their method, 
now He turned to their motives, and the figure again is quite familiar. 
A man who was householder planted a vineyard. Mark the words, 
how He still quoted from Isaiah. He “
set a hedge about it, and diggeda winepress in it, and built a tower.” It was the proprietor’s perfect 
provision made for fruit to be gathered from his vineyard ;
and the 
husbandmen were those to whom he gave responsibility for the cultivation 
of the vines and vineyard, so that fruit should be brought forth 
to meet the proper requirements of the possessor. That was their 
responsibility. 

Now, He said, in this case, when the time of fruit came, he sent 
his bond-servants, his servants, his slaves, his messengers to gather 
up the fruits ;
and those husbandmen stoned them, and killed them. 
Then he sent others, with the same result. At last-and is there not 
mighty power and tremendous force in this, coming from the lips of 
Jesus ?-at last he sent unto them his son. “
But the husbandmen, 
when they saw the son, said among themselves, This is the heir ;
come, let us kill him, and take his inheritance. And they took him, 
and cast him forth out of the vineyard, and killed him.” That is the 
story. 

“
When therefore the lord of the vineyard shall come, what will 
he do unto those husbandmen ?
”
Again, they were so intrigued by 
the story, they had forgotten their hostility to Jesus. They saw the 
truth, and became vehement in their reply. “ 
He will miserably 
destroy those miserable men, and will let out the vineyard unto other 
husbandmen, which shall render him the fruits in their season.” They 
has passed sentence upon themselves. It was they, the rulers of the 
people, in the long succession, who for centuries had failed to yield 
the fruit of the vineyard. It is impossible to avoid the sentence. 

For an interpretation of this, implicated and involved in the words 
of Jesus, we go back to Isaiah. There the vineyard instead of bringing 
forth grapes, brought forth wild grapes, and he explained his song, 
“
For the vineyard of the Lord of hosts is the house of Israel, and the 
men of Judah His pleasant plant. And He looked for judgment.” 
Change the word, not to improve it, but to interpret it. “
He looked 
for justice, but behold, oppression ;
for righteousness, but behold, a 
cry.”

Isaiah, in the Old Testament, tells us what the fruits were for 

112 PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

which God looked in that nation of His. They were to bring forth

in the world justice and righteousness, instead of which they had

brought forth oppression, and created a cry of the oppressed. That 

is what these men had been doing ;
and the culmination of their false 

rule and government of the people had come in the case of the Son

Himself. He knew what they were about to do. They were going to

cast Him out, and kill Him. 

When they had found their verdict, and passed that sentence, 

He passed His sentence. That is found in verse forty-three. He first 

quoted to them the Scripture about the rejected Stone being the Head

of the corner. He pronounced the sentence of utter and absolute ex
communication upon the whole Hebrew people, “
Therefore say I unto

you, The Kingdom of God shall be taken away from you, and shall be

given to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof. And he that falleth 

on this stone shall be broken to pieces ;
but on whomsoever it shall 

fall, it will scatter him as dust.” There is the judgment.

The marvel of this is that He compelled these men to find a verdict,
and pass a sentence. They who had failed to till and manage thevineyard of the Lord, so that the fruit for which God was seekingshould be brought forth, they who had said, I go, and yet had failed,
and they who had stoned the prophets, and such as were sent untothem, and were now preparing to cast out the Son and killHim-
there was only one thing to be done, that they should be miserablydestroyed, and the vineyard taken away from them, and given toothers. The Lord repeated the verdict as He pronounced the appallingsentence of excommunication. 

These parabIes, 
and others to follow, reveal the King’s authority.
That authority is demonstrated by the line of His accomplishment,
of the revelation of truth, His recognition of the Divine rights, Hisrestoration of a lost order. That was the purpose of His presencein the world. To these men who were not convinced, there was noargument of any avail. If they were not prepared to be honest enoughto face the fact that the baptism of John was from heaven, and consequently 
his identification of Jesus proved the authority of Jesus,
there was nothing else to be said to them. To men who were nothonest, there was no argument of any avail, and those who refused theevidences that were so simple and patent and clear were rejected.

As Jesus told these stories to those rulers, and they found outwhat He was doing, their anger was stirred to yet greater depths. Welearn therefore that ancient privilege is always unavailing when itdeparts from immediate and present responsibility. The King’s new 
teaching here was a return to fundamental intentions, and He showedhow the rulers of the people had failed, and declared that there shouldbe another nation that would not fail, but would bring forth the fruitsof justice and righteousness, for which God is ever seeking in Hisvineyard. 

THE MARRIAGE FEAST 

113
23. The Marriage Feast 
Matthew xxii :
1-14
HERE is an intimate connection between the forty-third verse inT
the previous chapter, and this parable. That verse read, “TheKingdom of God shall be taken away from you, and shall be givento a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof.” This chapter begins,
“
And Jesus answered and spake again in parables unto them, saying,
The Kingdom of heaven is likened unto a certain king, which made amarriage feast.” The linking of those two verses help us to see theimmediate significance of what our Lord was saying, and to discoverthe fact that it had a wide application, wider perhaps than we havebeen accustomed to think. 

This chapter begins in a strange and arresting way. It says,
“
Jesus answered.” Answered what ? No question had been askedHim. There is no account of anything that had been said immediatelyto Him. Yet Matthew, going straight on with his account, says, “
And 
Jesus answered.” Again we go back and look at the verses at the closeof the previous chapter. The forty-fourth verse reads, “
And he that 
falleth on this stone shall be broken to pieces ;
but on whomsoever it 
shall fall, it will scatter him as dust. And when the chief priests andthe Pharisees heard His parables, they perceived that He spake ofthem. And when they sought to lay hold on Him, they feared themultitudes, because they took Him for a prophet. And Jesus answered,”
that is, He answered their attitude, answered the question in theirminds, which had now become a conviction, perhaps suddenly andstartlingly so.

Our Lord had spoken the two parables of the sons and of the vineyard 
;
and
they had expressed their opinion upon the stories He hadtold them ;
and by so doing they had found a verdict against themselves, 
and passed sentence upon themselves. Then they suddenlyawoke to the fact of what they were doing, and their anger was stirred,
and they would have liked to kill Him. And the Lord answered. Itwas the result of their frame of mind. It was an answer to this mental 
attitude of those who were His enemies, of those rulers whom He hadnow come to Jerusalem thus to condemn. 

These were the final days in the life of our Lord on earth, and theseparables all move in that realm. On this third day, He was there inthe Temple as the great Prophet of God, the King, and Prophet,
dealing with the nation in august majesty and dignity. The twoparables we have considered had dealt with responsibility. Now He 
gave them a parable which dealt with privilege. In the former two 
parables, labourers were in view, and the vineyard was the back
8 
114
PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

ground. Now guests are in view, and the background is a marriage

feast. In the former, two commandments were laid upon men to

fulfil obligations. In this, an invitation is offered to men to accept

hospitality. So there is that difference between this parable and the

two former, though they are all linked together.

As He had been dealing by parabolic illustration with thefulfilment
of the responsibility of the rulers, and consequently of the nation, Henow gave to these selfsame
rulers a parable which dealt with therefused invitation, which had come through His ministry. Still further,
glancing at the whole of these fourteen verses, we see their structure.
The parable He now uttered was, in a remarkable way, predictive.
He was looking over the whole fact of His own ministry, to the ministryof His servants that should follow to the end of the age. That isclearly seen if we study this carefully. Three invitations are offered. 
The marriage feast is in the background, to which men are asked, butthere are three distinct invitations. 

The account of the first invitation is in verses two and three. The 
call was given, and those invited would not come. In the secondinvitation (four to seven) the call is renewed, and we have the responseof indifference and hostility. Then the third invitation, commencing,
“
Then saith He to the servants,” runs to the end of the parable.
Our Lord was referring to three events, resulting from His ownmission,

The first was that of His own mission. The second referred to 
His mission as it would be carried on by His servants, and that endedwith judgment and the destruction of the city, a literal prediction ofwhat happened a generation after, when Jerusalem was destroyed.
The third invitation applied to the period from the destruction ofJerusalem to the consummation of the age in which we are nowliving.

If we apply this parable in detail, this first section has no application 
to us now, save as we look back and learn from what happened.
The second section also has no application to us, except as we watchand see what happened. But we are living in the third section, andour responsibility is revealed in that part of the parable. The firstinvitation was the call that had already been given, in the ministryof Jesus. The second invitation was the call which was repeated byHis servants, from the time of His death to the destruction of thecity. The third began when He sent out no longer to them thatwere bidden, but into the highways and byways, that all might becalled in. There is perspective in this parable, and in that sense it isdistinctly predictive.

Glance at the three sections. “
The Kingdom of heaven is likenedunto a certain king, which made a marriage feast for his son.” The 
marriage feast is a figure of speech, and here our Lord was using anEastern picture. We need not go into any details. We are not con
THE MARRIAGE FEAST 

cerned
with them, save as we remember that the figure was borrowedfrom the Old Testament ideal of God’s relationship with man. The 
Old Testament symbolism was often strange and wonderful.Hosea,
speaking the words of God to the people, had said, “
I will betroth 
thee unto Me for ever.” Our Lord now took that symbolism of thebetrothal and marriage when illustrating the Kingdom of heaven.

In what sense can that be said to illustrate the Kingdom of heaven?
We have seen in the previous parables how they had failed to fulfilresponsibility, and that judgment would follow later. ‘Now our Lord 
turned definitely from responsibility to privilege. The Kingdom ofheaven which He had come to proclaim, and to be proclaimed, and 
which He is still continuing to proclaim, He likened it to a marriagefeast, something characterised
by all joy, gladness, and merriment.
So the Kingdom of heaven.

This Gospel of Matthew is peculiarly the Gospel of the King.
Jesus is seen therein as King. When He first came to His work, Heenunciated the laws of the Kingdom in the Sermon on the Mount.
After that He gave an exhibition of the benefits of His Kingship andthe Kingdom of God in the wonders He wrought (viii.-ix. 35).
In 
those chapters we see Him moving in every realm of human dereliction, 
material, mental, moral ;
healing the sick, casting out demons, forgiving 
sin-sick souls. First the laws of the Kingdom and then itsbenefits. From that point we see Him constantly enforcing the claimsof the Kingship of God. Keeping that in mind, then imagine a community 
wholly and absoIutely
yielded to those laws, and sharing in thebenefits of the power of that Kingdom, because themselves obedientto the claims of the King, seeking first the Kingdom of God. Imaginethat community, what have we ? The best answer is to let Paul speak.
“ 
The Kingdom of God is not eating and drinking.” What is it ? 
“ 
Righteousness, joy, peace.” Those are the issues of the Kingship ofGod, when it is recognized and yielded to. The Kingdom of God isnot a place of sombre gravity and dread solemnity: It is that, but it 
is infinitely more. It is the place first of righteousness, then of joy,
and of peace. Like the marriage feast, it is filled with gladness and 
song ;
to use a word the father used when the prodigal camehome-
merriment. The privileges He offered men were all there in theKingdom of heaven. He had been revealing that Kingdom, callingmen into it. The king sent his servants to call to the feast with the 

son. 

What happened ? They would not come. Here our Lord declaredthe national response. Of course individuals were answering theinvitation. There were those within the nation who had heard, whohad seen the joy and blessedness ;
the righteousness, joy, and peaceof the Kingdom, and had yielded to it so far as the light had come;
that little band of disciples, and the larger band seen in the upper roomlater, and the five hundred brethren at once to whom our Lord appeared 

116 PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

in Galilee. There was the elect remnant of the nation. But He was 
dealing with the nation and their rulers, and with the national outlook, 
and response as revealed through those rulers. They would not come. 
So our Lord here declared, on the human level, the failure of His own 
mission. He, the Son, had come to bring men into that marriage feast, 
the marriage of men with God, that issues in righteousness, joy, and 
peace ;
and they had refused it. “ 
They would not come.” 

” 
Again.” There is tremendous force in that word. Following 
through the historic sequence, we know what they did with the Son. 
We saw that in the previous parable. “
This is the heir ;
come, let 
us kill him, and take his inheritance.” He knew He was on His way 
to that death. The Son Himself was cast out, and cast out to death. 
But there was no faiIure
from the Divine standpoint. The failure was 
of the nation to accept the invitation to enter into the glad joy and 
peace and merriment of the Kingdom of God. 

Again, beyond His rejection, He sent forth other servants. The 
apostolic age began, the preachers went forth everywhere, as Mark 
says. We know all the story. They were still to go to them that were 
bidden, to the people who had rejected Him ;
even to the rulers who 
had rejected Him, the privileged, bidden people ;
and they were to 
say, “
Behold, I have made ready my dinner ;
my oxen and my 
fatlings are killed, and all things are ready ;
come to the marriage 
feast.” Here is an account of the sending out of invitations to come 
into all the blessedness of the Kingdom again, after the first apparent 
failure. We see them going, and as we watch them, they are going 
with the same message. Notice the simplicity, and yet the sublimity 
of it. What were they to say ?
“ 
All things are ready,” ‘ 
Killed,” 
is a figure of speech here, which meant that God had done everything 
to provide for the joy, peace, and gladness of humanity in the proclamation 
of His Kingdom. He had done everything. By the time 
when these went out, the Cross was accomplished, and the hatred of 
men was transmuted by His grace into something that provided for 
that very righteousness, joy, and peace. “All things are now 
ready.’ ’
Go back again to those that were bidden. Go even to those who 
would not come in the days of My own ministry, as though the Lord 
had said, Give them another opportunity. Go to them that were 
bidden. Tell them that all things are ready, that everything is done 
to create the joy, happiness, gladness, singing, and rapture of My 
Kingdom ;
and bid them come. 

What was the response ?
Again we necessarily go back to the 
centre of things where Jesus exercised His ministry. Our Lord said 
that the invitation would be treated with indifference by each one. 
“ 
They made light of it, and went their ways.” Mark the process, “
one 
to his own farm, another to his merchandise ”
;
and then by definite 
rebellion. Then the ill-treatment of the messengers, and their beating 

THE MARRIAGE FEAST 
and casting out. All that happened in that earlier apostolic age. Jesus 

clearly revealed what the result would be of the second refusal by those

who were bidden. 

Then “
the king was wroth, and he sent his armies, and destroyed

those murderers, and burned their city.“ That happened a generation

afterwards. As the Lord God Almighty in the past had girded Cyrus

for the carrying out of the punitive action against His own people, so

surely He girded the Roman armies, under Titus, as they swept upon

the city that for the second time had rejected the call ;
first the 

actual call of Jesus, and secondly the call of Jesus by the Holy

Spirit, through the messengers. The King was standing there, talking

to these rulers, and He clearly saw the things that were about to

happen.

What then ?
“
Then saith he to his servants, The wedding isready, but they that were bidden were not worthy ”
;
because theywere blind, they did not see ;
and they were evil and self-centred,
turning everyone to his own way, and ill-treating the very messengersof the king because they were blind to the meaning.

What is to be done now ?
“
Go ye therefore unto the partings ofthe highways “-a great phrase that,--“ the partings of the highways.”
The words were uttered by our Lord in that Roman world, celebratedfor its highways. Perhaps nothing more remarkable was done by thatRoman empire than the building of those highways. We have them 
still here in Britain. They beat out from Rome over all the knownworld, and along them Roman cohorts passed, and Greek merchantmen 
travelled. They were the great media of travel throughout theknown world. Therefore go there to the partings of the highways.
Overleap the boundaries which are merely geographical. Those whowere bidden, who had the privileges of nationality, and who lived inthe land where My ministry was conducted, are not worthy. Their citywill be destroyed. It will be burned with fire. Then the larger invitation 
will begin. Go to the partings of the highways, and as many asye shall find, bid to the marriage feast. When the bidden were demonstrated 
unworthy, then the invitation to the marriage feast, to thebenefits and beneficences
of the Kingdom of God, were offered to allmen. Go where the highways part, where they divide. Stand wherethe crowds will press and throng and cross each other ;
and into those 
highways pass, calling men everywhere to this great Kingdom.

Moreover He said, “
Those servants went out into the highways,
and gathered together all as many as they found, both bad and good;
and the wedding was filled with guests.” That does not mean thatthere was to be no further reference to moral conduct or standing inthe Kingdom. But if men in the highways have no character, no moralstanding, if they are bad, call them in. If they are good, by thestandards of the world, true to the light in them, and in that way theyare good, call them in, good and bad. The servants brought them in, 

1.18
PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 
guests of the King, admitted to all the great privileges of the Kingdom 

of God. 

That solemn word of Jesus at the end shows how true it is that 

there is moral discrimination in the Kingdom, notwithstanding the use 

of the word “
bad ”
there. We must interpret that by this. “
When 

the king cometh 
in to behold the guests,” to inspect them, “
he saw 

there a man which had not on a wedding garment, and he saith to him, 

Comrade, Friend, how camest thou in hither not having a wedding 

garment ? ”
A man had found his way in, but he lacked the true 

insignia of relationship. He was violating the true order of that 

Kingdom. This man has been described in modern parlance as a gate
crasher. It is a very suggestive description. Yes, he had gone in, 

and the fact he had not on a wedding garment showed indifference, 

carelessness, or objection. He was not of that company. He had not 

a wedding garment. 

Matthew says, The King “
saw there a man which had not on a 
wedding garment.” Then he said, “
Friend, how camest thou in hither 
not having a wedding garment ?
”
The little word rtot
appeared twice 
over, but it is not the same word on those two occasions. The first 
word, 0~
simply marks a fact ;
he had not it on. But when the king 
asked him the reason, Jesus used a slightly different word for “not “
Me, which suggested not merely the fact that he lacked the wedding 
garment, but that he did so definitely, of his own thought, and will, 
and intention. When the man came in not having a wedding garment, 
and the king talked to him, he said, It is not only a fact that you have 
not a wedding garment ; you did not intend having one. Your I
not ”
is the not of definite willing. You are determined not to have it on. 
Your presence in here is the supreme sign of your rebellion against 
the order set up, of which this marriage feast is the great symbol. 
“
And he was speechless ”
;
he had nothing to say. 

Then follows the terrible sentence. “
Cast him out into the outer 
darkness,” where there shall be sorrow and rebellion ;
”
there shall be 
the weeping and gnashing of teeth.” This was His revelation. That 
is the continuity of sin. “ 
Cast him out into the outer darkness.” 

The Kingdom of God has its responsibilities. They rest upon all 
of us who profess to belong to that Kingdom. The vineyard and thetwo sons revealed to us our responsibilities. This picture shows us 
all the glory and beauty of the Kingdom, resulting from its presentation 
by our Lord Christ. 

We ask, How does this apply to us as to responsibility ?
The 
fruit of the Kingdom of God as the Kingdom of heaven, I do not want 
to waste time discussing the difference between those terms. There is 
no difference, except that the Kingdom of heaven-a phrase Matthew 
mostly used, and used as employed by Jesus-expresses the result. 
The Kingdom of heaven is the realization of the
Kingship of God. We 
are praying that His Kingdom may come on earth as it is in heaven. 

PARABOLIC ILLUSTRATIONS 

When the prayer is answered, we have the Kingdom of heaven. The 
measure in which it is answered in our life, in the community of souls 
loyal to Him, that is the Kingship of God. The Kingdom does not 
merely mark a territory, but it marks the fact of authority, and 
the exercise of it ;
the Kingdom of God sought, yielded to, realized, 
Then look abroad, and the result is the Kingdom of heaven. Are we 
realizing it ?
That drives us back to another question. How far are we really 
submitted to the Kingdom of God ?
If we are, we know what it is to 
live in the Kingdom of heaven, righteousness the foundation, joy the 
result, and quiet peace the issue. It
is the marriage feast. The bells 
are always ringing, and the music always sounding. 

But there is a stern necessity for the wedding garment. The call 
is to all, but there must be the wedding garment. Jesus ended with 
that strange and wonderful word in connection with this parable, 
“ 
Many are called, but few chosen.” Many years ago, at a great 
meeting in London, Moody was speaking on this parable. Sitting on 
the platform by him was one of the great scholars of the Church, and 
a theologian, a mighty man. When Moody got to that point in his 
address, “ 
Many are called, but few are chosen,” he stopped, and said, 
“
Hold on, what does chosen mean ?
”
He turned to Dr. L., this scholar, 
and said, “
I would like to read it like this, Many are called, but few 
are choice.” Dr. L. said, “
You are quite right, Mr. Moody, that is the 
whole intention of it.” It is good to have such an authority. Jesus 
did not say, I am calling people, and choosing some, who are the 
chosen ones, those who accept the call. Those who do not accept, 
will return to their own imaginings and their own affairs. Those who 
obey, and fulfil the responsibility of the vineyard, and accept the 
invitation, will go in as guests in the festive house of God, to the feast 
which He has spread in His great Kingdom. Many are called, but few 
are chosen, choice in that sense. 

This is a great vision, sweeping over the centuries. Our Lord saw 
the Kingdom not only as a vineyard, having to be cultivated, but as 
a feast, a marriage of merriment, and of peace. 

24.
Parabolic Illustrations 
Matthew xxiii 

IT IS important to have a general sense of the whole movement of 
this chapter, for against that background we find illustrations our 
Lord used in the course of His discourse. We are at once reminded of 
the inevitable solemnity of the occasion. This chapter records the final 
hours of Jesus in the Temple. After this discourse He left it, to gc 

120 PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

back no more. His word had excommunicated the Hebrew people,
not from salvation, or the possibility of it, but from the office theyhad held by Divine appointment, of being the instrument throughwhich the Kingdom of God was to be proclaimed and revealed among 
men. He had uttered His final, Kingly, Divine word of excommunication 
when He said to the nation through the rulers, “
The Kingdomof God shall be taken away from you, and shall be given to a nationbringing forth the fruits thereof.”

This twenty-third chapter is a continuous discourse, and we observeit falls into three distinct parts. The first part was addressed to themultitudes and His disciples. Notice the opening words of the chapter.
He was still there in Temple precincts. The crowds were all roundabout Him. Nearest to Him were His own disciples, and in the firsttwelve verses He addressed Himself to the disciples and to the crowds.
As we read, it is easy to see the part intended for the multitudes, andthe particular part intended for His own disciples.

Beginning at the thirteenth verse, still in the same situation, thedisciples and the multitudes still there, and the rulers with whom Hehad dealt in the earlier chapter ;
He began to address Himself directlyto those rulers, and those in authority. That section beginning atverse thirteen ends at verse thirty-six.

The third section was addressed, out of His heart, to the city ofJerusalem, as He saw it. There it was, represented by the rulers.
There were multitudes of Jerusalem folk gathered in the Temple, andunquestionably others. There was the city of Jerusalem itself, builtround about that Temple, and He addressed Himself to the city asthe mother of the nation. That is in verses thirty-seven tothirty-
nine. 

In all the record of the words of Jesus we have nothing quite sofull of terror as His discourse that day to the rulers. It is noticeable 
that He pronounced upon these rulers, scribes, and Pharisees an eightfold 
Woe. It is significant when He began His public ministry, andenunciated His great ethic in the Sermon on the Mount, He began withan eightfold Beatitude. Now to the rulers specifically, definitely,
those who had been hostile to Him from the beginning, and whosehostility had grown upon them, He pronounced an eightfold Woe.
Take the eight Beatitudes and Woes, and they stand over againsteach other ;
and we can see how they answered each other in the mostwonderful way.

In the course of that discourse He employed certain illustrations.
In the first two movements He made use of six parabolic illustrationsand then when addressing Jerusalem, unveiling His heart, He madeuse of one. All these illustrations were in the realm of denunciation,
all uttered on the same day, in the same place, in the same discourse;
and then a parabolic illustration unveiling His heart.

Whereas the illustrations themselves are brief as to words, they 

PARABOLIC ILLUSTRATIONS 

are graphic beyond degree, and as a clear and sharp lightning flash

they lit up the things He was saying, whether of denunciation, or of

the unveiling of His heart.

Take the words briefly. “
They bind heavy burdens ”
(v. 4).

The picture is common, but it is very graphic. “
Blind guides ”
(v. 16).

Again an illustration, but the picture is absurd, though graphic. “
The 

gnat ”
and “
the camel ”
(v. 24). The picture is grotesque, and there
fore graphic. “ 
The cup,” “
the platter ”
(v. 26). The picture is

disgusting, and so graphic. “
Whited sepulchres ”
(v. 27). The

picture is appalling, and very graphic. “ 
Serpents,” “
brood of vipers”
(v. 33). The picture is terrible, and so graphic. Then “
a hen ”
and 
“
her chickens ”
(v. 37). The picture is simple, and therefore graphic.
That brief reference to each descriptive phrase, each parabohc
lightmarvellously illuminated what He was saying.
Take that first word. “ 
They bind heavy burdens.” The picture,
common at the time was that of an overladen beast of burden, of ahorse, or an ass, upon which burdens were placed all too heavy for it to 
carry. In this country a draft-horse should never be expected to pullmore than its own weight. I was once standing by a friend of mine,
a member of my church, a great contractor, as he was superintendingsome of his work. He saw a draft-horse laden, coming up ;
and I 
saw him look at it. I wondered at the fierceness in his eyes. He 
stopped it, and said to the cartman,
“
What load is on that cart ? ”
He said, “ 
Two tons, sir.” He replied, “
Keep that load down to a 
ton ; 
no horse can pull more than its own weight.” The figure hereis that of a beast of burden, with a weight put upon it that it has noright to be carrying ;
and, indeed, in the last analysis, cannot carry.
It will sink beneath it. Jesus said to those rulers, that was what theywere doing, overloading these beasts of burden, abusing authority byputting upon men burdens they could not possibly carry.

It is wonderful what our Lord said in that connection. He said,
These men, scribes and Pharisees, sit in Moses’ seat. The word “
seat ”
there stands for authority. It is the word cathedra. To-day we saymen speak ex cathedra,
that is, out of the seat of authority. Jesus 
said these men sat in Moses’ seat. He really said they had seatedthemselves in Moses’ seat. That is the force of the Greek word. The 
whole order of scribes had arisen, not improperly ;
indeed, Jesus setHis imprimatur upon it as being permissible. But it was not a Divine 
appointment originally. They set themselves in Moses’ seat, that isthey were there to interpret the law as given to men through Moses.
“ 
Therefore,” put emphasis upon the “ 
therefore,” “all thingswhatsoever they bid you, these do and observe.” But they hadsaid so many things that men could not do ;
they had boundburdens on men that they could not bear. They had added tothe law multiplied traditions, crushing the soul, and making menturn from the law, and from God. 

I22
PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

Did the Master mean if they sat in Moses’ seat the people were to 
do anything the rulers told them ?
No ; when they spoke according tothe law, tken
they were to be obedient. But He said to the rulers 
that their whole method of tradition, superimposed upon the law of 
of God, men could not carry. “
Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, 
hypocrites.” Why ? They were putting these burdens upon men, 
but were not carrying them, and they would not help. He did not mean 
they would not help men to carry them, but they would not carry 
them themselves. 

In that connection He went on to show the disciples what they 
were to do. In the thirteenth chapter He had appointed His disciples 
the new scribes, the moral interpreters. “
Every scribe who hath been 
made a disciple to the Kingdom of heaven is like unto a man that is 
a householder, which bringeth forth out of his treasure things new 
and old.” They were scribes. His disciples were His new scribes. He 
was denouncing these scribes who had bound burdens upon men, who 
had become taskmasters, cruel even in their enunciation of law. Notice 
now what He said to His disciples. Do not be called Rabbi. Do not 
be called Father. Do not be called Master. All these words indicated 
their mission, and reveal the value of their teaching. They were 
servants. So He was sending forth His own disciples. He was sending 
them out on that great mission ;
and it was that of service, not to 
bind heavy burdens upon men, but to serve men for the lifting of 
burdens and bringing of release. 

Then in the sixteenth verse He said, “
Woe unto you, ye blind 
guides.” Again in verse twenty-four, “ 
Ye blind guides.” There is 
another parabolic illustration, absurd and therefore graphic. One 
blind man is trying to lead blind men. The guide who should knowthe way, and be familiar with it, and lead others along it, is himself 
blind. He does not see the way at all. 

Our Lord was illustrating the fact that these men had given interpretations 
of the law, and of the ritual, which inverted order, proving 
that they themselves did not see. They were making the gold more 
valuable than the Temple. They were making the gift more valuable 
than the altar, forgetting it was the Temple that sanctified the gold, 
the altar that made sacred the gift. “
Blind guides !
”
They couldnot see themselves. Their spiritual vision of relative values had faded,

and yet there they were, teaching the people, and because they did 
not see, their teaching was utterly false. 

In close connection He went on. “
Blind guides, which strain out 
the gnat, and swallow the camel.” What a grotesque idea it is. The 
picture is one of a man with a goblet. He is about to drink, and there 
is a gnat, and he is particular to get it out ;
and there is a camel, 
and he swallows it. It is intended to be grotesque, and to show exactly 
what these men were doing. “
Woe unto you scribes and Pharisees, 
hypocrites !
”
It is a picture of most glaring inconsistency. Observe 

PARABOLIC ILLUSTRATIONS 

in passing our Lord did not say it was wrong to tithe mint and 

anise and cummin.
As a matter of fact He said they ought to 

do so. But the trouble was, while they did that, and got the

gnat out of their drinking goblet, they were neglecting essential 

values, and swallowing the camel. ‘
Woe unto you scribes and 

Pharisees, hypocrites I
”
We come next to the cup and platter. The picture is graphically 

disgusting. Certainly nothing could be more loathsome than a dirty 

cup inside, when the outside was clean. But our Lord used the figure 

intelligently. It was disgusting. They were very careful that the out
side was clean, but it did not matter what the inside was like. The 

commonplace reaction of every man and woman is that it is disgusting ;
yet that is exactly what these men were doing. They were eager 

about the maintenance of an external appearance, which was a lie, 

because within they were full of every form of corruption and evil. 

I am not staying to apply these things. I am leaving the Holy Spirit

to do that. These are all perils for us all the time. 

Then the figure of a “ 
whited sepulchre,” a peculiarly Easternfigure, a burying place, in which only corpses are placed, and are 
covered over, and whited. The picture is appalling and graphic. In 
that Eastern country it meant anyone buried, and people walking 
across the place where corruption was going forward, were in danger. 
It is not by external whiteness and cleanness that we are in danger 
of deadly infection. The rulers, scribes, and Pharisees were whited 
sepulchres. They were practising
a deceit which had in it a terrible 
menace to others. They were concerned with an external appearancewhich veiled an inward corruption. Men and women incessantlycrossing their pathway, attracted, at least not repelled by all the whiteappearance, nevertheless were inhaling the deadly germs of their own 
wrong and corruption. “
Whited sepulchres ! ”
Once more, “
Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites !
.
.
.
serpents, ye offspring of vipers,” the spawn of Gpers.
The 
picture is terrible. Serpents, the offspring, the brood, the spawn of 
the viper ;
the keen eye, the poisonous bite. Jesus said, That is where 
you hypocrites belong, to that realm of dire peril to men. He gave 
the reasons. So in all these we hear Him in that last discourse 
within a
Temple precincts, uttering these terrible Woes, and by 
illustration showing their reason, and revealing the truth about 
these men. 

Come to the final illustration. “
As a hen doth gather her brood 
beneath her wings,” simple, and yet graphic. It is one of the most 
beautiful pictures of motherhood that can possibly be imagined. It is 
not necessary to dwell upon it. We have evidences of it in all our 
villages, hamlets, and farmsteads. We have seen the mother hen, when 
the sharp cry of a hawk is heard, suddenly gather all the little ones 
under her outspread wings. There is no need to enlarge upon it. It is 

124
PARABLES AND METAPHORS 0% OUR LORD 

such a wonderful picture. Jesus said as He addressed Jerusalem, the 

great centre and mother of the national life, which was under the 

influence of the hypocrites, the scribes and Pharisees, which had 

scattered her children, and driven them out into all the places of deadly 

peril, I
0 Jerusalem, Jerusalem, ”
what that hen does for those chickens 

I fain would have done for you. ‘
How often would I have gathered 

thy children together, even as a hen gathereth her chickens under 

her wings.” The whole illustration thrills and pulsates with the 

Motherhood
of God. I did not say Fatherhood. That is a great 

truth, but the other truth is as vitally revealed in the Bible. “
As one 

whom his mother comforteth, so will I comfort you.” Those are God’s 

words. Jesus took that great figure of Motherhood, in its simplest 

ritual manifestation, the picture of the hen and the brood, and He 

said, That is what I want, that is what I came for, that is what I fain 

would have done. 

“ 
Woe,” uttered eight times over. It was necessary because of 

human choices and misrepresentations ;
but that was not what His 

heart desired. He would have gathered them as a hen gathers her 

brood beneath her wings. 

So among the last sentences in that Temple, even after the 
pronouncement of His Woes upon the rulers who had misled the 
people, He unveiled His heart. Yet that was the prelude to His ultimate 
sentence. “ 
Your house is left unto you desolate.” He had often 
been in that House. If we treat the word as local, as certainly it was, 
while referring to far more, to the whole dynasty and economy, He 
had often been in that House. He was going out of it, and as Hewent He said, “
Your house is left unto you desolate.” In the course 
of the ministry He had called that Temple, ” 
My Father’s House.” 
He had called it “ 
My House.” Now He called it “ 
your house,” 
and it is desolate. 

Yet while that was the sentence, it was the penultimate 
sentence, and the very last word is this, “
For I say unto you, 
ye shall not see Me henceforth, till ye shall say, Blessed is He that 
cometh in the name of the Lord.” Thus through the appalling 
gloom of desolation there shone a light that spoke of a day of 
restoration when they would say, “
Blessed is He that cometh in 
the name of the Lord.” 

The main thing is His description of those rulers. The key word, 
“ 
hypocrites,” was uttered six times over, perhaps seven, As we see 
Him thus denouncing hypocrisy, we observe all through His passion 
for righteousness, and we find in the unveiling of His heart His compassion 
for the worst. His passion for righteousness never destroys 
His compassion ;
but His compassion never destroys His passion for 
righteousness. 

PARABOLIC ILLUSTRATIONS 

25.
Parabolic Illustrations 
Matthew xxiv 

N
THE parabolic illustrations and parables which remain to be 

considered in this Gospel again we find ourselves in a changed 

atmosphere. The illustrations throughout the three previous chapters 

have moved in the realm of judgment and of denunciation. In this 

twenty-fourth chapter our Lord had left the Temple and the city of 

Jerusalem, never to return until He was taken back as Prisoner. 

As they passed out of the Temple, His disciples drew His attention 
to the buildings. I wonder why they did so, for He surely knew them. 
Note His immediate reply. He said, “
See ye not all these things ? 
Immediately before this, before they left the Temple, He had declared, 
“ 
Your house is left unto you desolate.” As they went out, the discipIes
said, Lord, let us show You these buildings. It was unthinkable to 
them that that house should ever be desolate ;
but within a generation 
from that time it was literally true. He now said, “
See ye not all 
these things ? ”
Take a good look at them, because they are going. 
”
There shall not be left here one stone upon another, that shall not 
be thrown down.” Remember the Temple as it then was, for material 
magnificence there had been nothing like it. The temple of Solomon 
had been wonderful, but the temple of Herod,
from the standard of 
material magnificence far outshone the glories of Solomon’s temple. 
It was a wondrous structure, and He said, “
Not .. .
one stone uponanother, that shall not be thrown down.” 

Then they went down from the city. Follow them in imagination 
along the way they took, across the Kedron, and up the slopes of 
Olivet. When they came there, He sat, and the disciples came to Him 
privately, and they said, ”
Tell us, when shall these things be ? and 
what shall be the sign of Thy coming, and of the end of the age ?
”
-the consummation of the age. I resolutely change that phrase, 
“ 
end of the world,” and adopt the marginal reading, which is correct. 
They were not asking when the end of the world would be, in the sense 
of the break-up of the material structure, as some people seem to 
imagine, even now. No, it was the consummation of the age. Their 
question really resolved itself into three :
first, When shall these things 
be ? secondly, What shall be the sign of Thy coming ?
third, What 
shall be the sign of the end of the age ?

They were three perfectly natural questions. I do not think they 
meant to ask three, but one. They had heard Him say the things 
that were coming to pass. They had heard Him in denunciation declare 
the tribulations that were coming. Now they said, When is it all going 
to happen, when ? It is interesting how all down the ages men have 

126 PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR
LORD 

been busy asking that futile question, When ? These men started 

it. They said, When ?
and they linked up the things He had foretold 

with His presence, the sign of His coming, His parousia, His presence 

again in the world. They felt that His prediction of the consummation 

of the age involved the winding up of all things, and they believed 

it would be brought about by His presence ;
but what they wanted 

to know was, When ?
It was a plain question that they asked. 

Our Lord answered them. I take now only the beginning of His 

answer. When they had asked their question, He said, “
Take heed 

that no man lead you astray.” We are interested now only in the two 

things. They said, When ? and they did not understand what the 

things were to which they were referring. They thought they did. 

They still had their material conception of a Kingdom that was to 

be set up, that the Roman power was to be destroyed, and the Messiah 

would reign there, materially. They had no correct vision of the 

future. I am not criticizing them. We are trying to see how they 

looked at things. They believed He would bring all this about. They 

wanted to know how long they and the world would have to wait. 

To that the first answer of Jesus was, Be careful, lest you are led 

astray, for many will come, claiming to be Christ. 

Jesus then answered their question. That answer occupies the 
whole of this and the next chapter. To that question asked by the 
disciples our Lord gave a long and fuller answer than He had ever 
given before, or ever did again, showing there was vital importance 
in what they asked, even though they were mistaken in their outlook. 
He showed that there would be a consummation, that these things 
were to come to pass, showing, moreover, in the course of His answerthat they would be connected with His own coming, His own Parousia, 
His presence. He sat there upon the slopes of Olivet as Teacher, and 
with that group of men honestly perplexed, He surveyed all the 
coming centuries. In this prophecy He uttered definite predictions, 
looking on down the centuries. 

While it is not our subject now to deal with the prophecy, it is 
difficult to look at the illustrations He used without having the background 
in mind. As we study carefully we find He broke their question 
up into three parts, and showed when “
these things ”
would be, that 
they would not be immediate ;
and then what should be “
the sign 
of His coming ”
;
and finally showed clearly what would be the nature 
of “ 
the consummation of the age.” This Olivet discourse moved 
wholly within the realm of prophecy. He was looking on to things 
beyond His departure. He knew He was going to Jerusalem to be 
killed ;
He knew He was going to rise again ;
and He was in no 
perplexity as to the course events would take. He was making no 
speculation as to the future. He clearly marked the course of events 
all down that period after His Cross and ascension until the present 
hour, and beyond it. 

PARABOLIC ILLUSTRATIONS 

Does anyone whisper, When will the end be ?
I recommend to all 

such the answer Christ gave to His own disciples, and pray that we 

may ever put upon the things of God the measurements of His own 

outlook, in which there was an utter absence of dates, or of the fixing 

of an hour. Processes, events are marked, the consummation is 

revealed ;
but there are no dates from first to last. 

The illustrations have to do with that period, and principally with 

the consummation of the age. We find then in this twenty-fourth 

chapter five illustrations. The first was that of lightning. The second 

was that of a carcase
with eagles gathered round. The third was that 

of the fig-tree. The fourth was that of a master of the house, and 

the thief, the burglar ;
and the last was that of the lord presiding 

over his household. Let us take each briefly, following our usua

line. 

Verse 27, “
For as the lightning cometh
forth from the east, and 
is seen even unto the west ;
so 
shall be the coming of the Son of man.” 
Our Lord had foretold definitely the destruction of Jerusalem. What 
He had said about the Temple is involved in what He said, “
When 
therefore ye see the abomination of desolation, which was spoken of 
by Daniel the prophet, standing in the holy place.” That was fulfilled 
when the Roman armies invaded the Temple. Then the abomination 
of desolation was standing in the holy place. The Master was looking 
on to the fall of Jerusalem which came within a generation. He 
had foretold it, and He was now warning His disciples that the fall of 
Jerusalem, the wars and rumours
of wars before that event, and the 
actual “
abomination of desolation standing in the holy place ”
were 
not the signs of His advent. He foresaw all these things, but theydid not signify the nearness of His advent ;
and in that connection He 
used the figure of the lightning. 

The figure is so simple that there is no need of interpretation. 
Lightning is seen from one arc of heaven to the other. It is patent 
and self-evident, and He was insisting upon this in connection with 
His coming, that it will be as clear and as patent as the flash of the 
lightning across the sky from the east to the west. His coming will 
have a universal manifestation. We must not forget that the figure 
is used to show that the fall of Jerusalem, and the trouble immediately 
coming on the generation, was not the sign of His coming at 
all. Some believe that He came in connection with the fall of 
Jerusalem, and that His coming is past. But nothing can be clearer 
that was not the sign of His coming. When that hour comes, it will 
be something self-evident to the whole world. Of course the figure 
He used took in a hemisphere. If we watch the lightning, we only 
see it in a hemisphere. It goes from east to west, and from the point 
where it ends as to our observation, it goes on again. This figure: 
showing that His coming, when it takes place, will be universal, known 
and self-evident, needs no proof either than its own manifestation. 

128 PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

Immediately following it, we have the words, “
Wheresoever the 

car-case is, there will the eagles be gathered together.” The Old 

Version reads, ” 
For wheresoever.” It shouId
read as in the Revised 

Version, He had talked about the lightning. Then, “
Wheresoever 

the carcase 
is, there will the eagles be gathered together.” What did 

He mean by that ?
What was He illustrating ? This illustration is 

in exactly the same realm as the former one, but here with a judgment 

application. The coming of the Son of man will be as patent as 

flashing lightning across the sky, but what will it mean ? He was 

referring now to the judgment that was going to fall. 

Take the figure of speech in all its simplicity. Vultures, carrion 

birds, swift birds, detecting the presence of a dead thing, fasten 

upon it for its complete annihilation. He was looking on to the 

condition of death that would obtain at His advent, 

Do we really believe that 7
Our Lord distinctly said, “
When the 

Son of man cometh,
shall He find faith on the earth ? ”
All exposition 

that says the victory of the Kingdom will be compIetely
won at 

His coming is unscriptural. There will be a terrible condition of 

affairs, and however much we may be perplexed by some of the 

details, if we carefully read the book of Revelation, we see some of 

the awful conditions, and fearful blasphemy against all the advance
ment of goodness, until this culmination in judgment. The world in 

its final outworking of its choices and inspiration is looked upon as 

dead ;
and the vultures represent the last processes of judgment. 

Where the carcase
is, there will they be gathered together. 

Pass on to verse thirty-two, to His next illustration, the fig-tree. 
The coming of the Son of man shall be manifest like the lightning;
the coming of judgment when the vultures gather together over the 
dead, the carrion of a world that has rejected God ;
and yet notice, 
from the fig-tree learn this parable. It is interesting to notice in 
passing that Luke also records the saying, and adds four words 
Matthew omitted, that Jesus said, “
Behold the fig-tree, and all the 
trees.” So do not lay too much emphasis on the fig-tree, although the 
picture was the symbol of the people and of the nation. Do not 
imagine the Lord was only speaking of the Jewish people, but of ‘
all 
the trees.” He was taking a simple illustration from Nature. What 
was it ?
That there are signs in Nature by which we can know 
summer is coming. We need not take the fig-tree. We can take the 
balsam-tree. Some of us have seen it blossoming. It is a prophecy 
of what is coming. We see the burgeoning of the trees, and we know 
summer is coming. 

Now mark what our Lord says. Lightning, vultures, acarcase
;
but as a process, leading on to something, summer. “
Now is the 
winter of our discontent,” but there is summer-time coming ;
and in 
a simple and yet beautiful figure of speech, here He returned to the 
subject of His second Advent, and showed that there would be signs 

PARABOLIC ILLUSTRATIONS 

that lead to it, signs that show these things of His own glory mani
fested, and the things of a sharp act of judgment, destroying th e 

dead carcase,
and the sign of summer. We may know by these things 

that the summer is nigh. 

Go on to verse forty-three. “
Know this, that if the master of 

the house had known in what watch the thief was coming, he would 

have watched, and would not have suffered his house to be broken 

through. Therefore be ye also ready ;
for in an hour that ye think 

not the Son of man cometh.” Our Lord has returned to the ultimate 

idea of the consummation. This portion of His discourse had to do 

largely with the responsibility of His people, To that subject we 

come more fully in subsequent parables. The subject He was illus
trating here was the need for vigilance, alertness, watchfulness ;
and He took that commonplace illustration of a man who had a 

house. He is the master of the house, and the thief may dig through 

-that is the actual word-and break in upon it. Now if the master 

of the house had known when the thief was coming, he would have 

prevented his breaking through. Therefore watch, for ye do not know 

when the Son of man is coming. 

This is an illustration by contrast, the Lord Himself in contrast 

with the thief. The idea is that if a man knew when the thief was 

coming, he would watch. We are to watch, because we do not know, 

and because we do not know, there is all the more necessity for 

watchfulness. The Master added three words here, “ 
at every season,” 

marking the necessity for watchfulness. 

Then the last of these illustrations is in close connection. “
Who 
then is the faithful and wise servant, whom his lord hath set over 
his household.” This marks the responsibility of those who are 
watching. It is difficult to get these illustrations placed in relation 
to the great mosaic of the discourse. We are now looking to the 
consummation of the age. We do not know when it is coming. 
There will be signs that mark it near, and those are the signs of 
judgment, clearing the way for the glory that is to be revealed. We 
do not know when that event will take place, hence the necessity for 
watchfulness, alertness, diligence ;
all which words may be expressed 
in another-readiness. 

How are we to be ready ?
Our Lord took the figure of the household 
where the lord is absent. The servants are left, responsible 
for the things of that household, and this subject illustrates the 
responsibility of the watchers. What is their responsibility ?
“
Blessed 
is that servant, whom his lord when he cometh shall find so doing,” 
watching. How ?
Giving to each in the household his “
food in due 
season. Verily I say unto you, that he will set him over all that hehath. But if that evil servant shall say in his heart, My lord tarrieth ;
and shall begin to beat his fellow-servants, and shall eat and drink 
with the drunken ;
the lord of that servant shall come in an hour 

9 

130
PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

when he expecteth not, and in an nom
when he knoweth not, and 
shall cut him asunder, and appoint his portion with the hypocrites ;
there shall be the weeping and gnashing of teeth.” 

What an august majesty of outlook. At the consummation of the 
age appalling things are going to happen ;
and there will be the 
judgment of wickedness. His charge to His own is that they shall 
watch, be diligent, alert, be ready. Then this little illustration shows 
that the true test of vigilance for the absent Lord, and expectation 
of His coming, is right behaviour within His own household. Here 
His Church is in view, down the ages. A communal relationship 
must be maintained, and if within that household there are those 
who are professedly the servants of the absent Lord, who are not 
behaving as they ought to do to their brethren, we can go on into 
the New Testament, and to the letters of John especially, and find 
words that interpret all that behaviour. There can be no watching 
for the coming Lord on the part of people who are first of all behaving 
as they ought not to each other within His household ;
and who are 
giving way to riotous excess of living on the earthly plane. There 
must be the watchfulness, true fellowship and behaviour within the 

household, until the Lord shall come. 

If when He comes, He finds these things have not been so, then 
mark the almost terrible word, “ 
In an hour when he knoweth not,” 
He shall come, and “ 
shall cut him asunder,” put him out, “
appoint 
his portion with the hypocrites,” where there shall be sorrow, and 
perpetual rebellion, in other words, “ 
weeping and gnashing of teeth.” 

All these illustrations need the context perhaps as none other 
we have considered. Let us note the vision of Christ, the interpretation 
of Christ in answer to the questions of His disciples, as He said 
to them, Take heed, do not be led astray. Do not imagine that the 
Advent is so near, or that things are coming to a consummation 
as speedily as you imagine. Many will arise, false christs,
and claim 
that they have come for fulfilment
of all things. Do not believe 
them. Do not go out to the wilderness to them. Watch and wait, 
knowing that we do not know the hour, but that we know the fact, 
and are living in the power of it by true relationship with each other 
within the household of God, and so hasten the coming of the Day. 

26.
The Ten Virgins 
Matthew xxv :
1-13
CHAPTERS twenty-four and twenty-five constitute one great wholein the teaching of our Lord, occasioned by a prediction that He 
had made about the destruction of the Temple, and the question then 
raised by His disciples, as the result of that prediction. This unbroken 

THE TEN VIRGINS 

discourse of Jesus was uttered, not to the promiscuous crowds, but 
to His own disciples. 

It is impossible to take this parable, or the one immediately 
following this, without a consciousness of the whole discourse. Our 
Lord was illustrating great truths in the realm of His predictive discourse, 
delivered to His own disciples, on Olivet. 

The first word of this chapter is important, “ 
Then.” There was 
no break in His discourse. What He now said in this parable followed 
immediately upon what He had been saying before, when He had 
used the illustration of the householder, and the wise and faithful 
servant therein, and those who were unwise and unfaithful in the 
household. He had ended that illustration by saying those unfaithful 
and unwise were to have their portion appointed with the hypocrites, 
“ 
there shall be the weeping and gnashing of teeth.” ‘
Then shall 
the Kingdom of heaven be likened unto ten virgins.” He was referring 
to that time, already referred to in the previous chapter, and the 
parabolic illustrations of the householder and the servants when the 
lord comes. “ 
Then shall the Kingdom of heaven be likened unto.” 
In that IittIe
word ”
Then ”
is the key to the interpretation. When 
will the Kingdom of heaven be like this ?
Not to-day. This parable of 
the ten virgins is often used as an evangelistic message. Evangelistic 
values may be deduced from it, but our Lord was not referring to 
this period, but to the consummation of the period, the time when 
the Lord shall come. 

His discourse included the parabolic illustration of the householder 
and servants, and this parable of the virgins, and that which 
immediately and consecutively follows. There was no break. Againwe have the word ”
For ”
at verse fourteen. The three parables 
followed each other, all belonging to the consummation of the age ;
intended for His own, not for the world outside. In every case thereis an absent lord ;
but in each case the absent lord returns, and it is 
with this return of the absent lord these parables deal. They reveal 
certain aspects of the responsibilities of His own while the Lord is 
absent, in the light of what will transpire when the Lord returns. 
The parable of the household, the lord absent, his servants left in 
charge ;
the parable of the lord as bridegroom absent, certain people 
left there to wait for him ;
and the parable of the absent lord, having 
bestowed talents upon his own, and their response. 

A threefold responsibility is revealed in the three parables. They 
link and merge in revelation. The first parable dealt with communal 
responsibility, within the circle of His own, concerning their behaviour 
towards each other. The whoIe
Church is seen there. The second, 
that of the ten virgins, is still responsibility, but it is the responsibility 
of individual life that is manifest here. In the next parable, that of 
the talents, we shall see the responsibility of the Church with regard 
to imperial matters, the empire of Jesus, and trading for Him in His 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

absence. First, how we should behave inside, communal responsibility-
the parable of the householder. Then personal responsibility, 
what our attitude should be in the presence of the absence of the 
Lord, and the expectation of His return-the parable of the virgins. 
Then the imperial responsibility, as He has entrusted to us certain 
things for which we are responsible-the parable of the talents. 

“ 
Then,” when the Lord shall come to deal with His people concerning 
their communal responsibility, as was revealed at the end of 
the previous chapter, “
Then shall the Kingdom of heaven be likened 
unto ten virgins.” What was the subject which our Lord was illustrating 
?
He was looking on to the consummation of the age, created 
by the coming of the Bridegroom. The parable is a figure of the bride 
and bridegroom. He is showing here the relation to that consummation 
of those whose duty is that of being prepared for it. The emphasis 
here is not on service. The symbols are not those of service, but of 
life. Everything leads up to that final injunction, “ 
Watch.” He 
has shown what our responsibility is towards each other, that there 
is to be a love-mastered community. Now, coming closer to the 
individual application, He takes this parable. 

The figure employed is very simple, and Eastern. This Eastern 
scene was commonplace. Every one who heard Him would understand 
it. Moreover we must not strain it in exposition. There is no 
mention of the bride in this story. That may give some pause. It 
is interesting how many people have tried to find
the bride in the 
story, and have said that the wise virgins were the bride. There may 
be an element of truth in it. But the figure here is not of the bride, 
but of the bridegroom. Such an undoubted scholar as Trench, and 
others, interpret this whole parable as referring to the homecoming 
of the bridegroom with his bride. Generally, however, it is interpreted 
as the bridegroom coming for His bride, and that certainly harmonizes 
with other Scriptures. In that sense it may be said that the five wise 
virgins represent the true bride of Christ. The figure represents 
those who waited for the bridegroom when he comes. 

We need not go into the particulars of the Eastern picture, because 
it is SO simple and familiar. The Bridegroom is away, and whether 
He is coming for His people or with His bride at the moment is not 
important. There are those who were expected to be waiting for 
Him, for His coming. These are represented by these virgins. They 
were all waiting for His coming, they were all expecting Him. They 
all had lamps, and at a certain moment they all trimmed their lamps. 
Here is a picture of the light of that period, fed with oil, needing to 
have the wick constantly trimmed. That is the figure. 

As they waited, “ 
they all slumbered and slept,” which does not 
suggest negligence on their part. It is natural and right. It is rather 
interesting that “
slumbered and slept ”
would be better interpreted 
if put in another way, they nodded, and went right off !
That is 

THE TEN VIRGINS I33
precisely what this means. They were waiting. It was night. They 

were waiting for the bridegroom, not knowing when he was coming ;
and necessarily and properly, they got drowsy, and they all went 

to sleep. 

Then came the cry that told them the event for which they had 
waited was at hand. “
Behold, the bridegroom !
Come ye forth to 
meet him.” Then we see that five of them heard the cry, awoke, 
trimmed their lamps, adjusted the wicks to find their own flame, 
and they had no oil. Five of them did exactly the same, but in their 
case there was oil, and the flame shone out in the darkness. Then 
those who lacked oil turned to those who had it, and said, “
Give US 
of your oil ; 
for our lamps are going out.” No, they could not do 
that. This has been criticized. A good preacher some while ago 
said the good virgins were a selfish crowd when they said they dare 
not share their oil. But they were quite right. If they shared their 
oil they also would be without light. The oil is individual in the case 
of those burning torches, and cannot be shared. The foolish virgins 
had to go and find oil, and they went ;
but it was too late. Those 
that were ready had entered in, and the door was shut. 

What is this picture ? Bear in mind that which we have seen 
already, but which needs emphasizing. It is a picture of the consummation. 
It is one phase of truth, the hour when the absent Lord returns. 
The absent Lord is coming back, when men render an account of 
stewardship. That is seen in the next parable ;
but here the absent 
Lord is coming back, and at His coming there will be the revelation of 
truth concerning those who have supposedly been His own during the

period of His absence. The whole Church is here revealed. Yet I 
would amend that, and rather say it is a picture of Christendom. A 
very clear distinction should be drawn between the Church of God and 
Christendom. The Church of God consists of those who have the oil, 
and whose lights are burning, and who are ready when the Lord comes. 
Christendom is bigger than that. Here is a picture of the consummation, 
and the whole of Christendom is in it. Note carefully what we 
have already seen. There are similarities between the five foolish and 
five wise virgins, and they are remarkable similarities. They all 
expected Him. Apparent expectation on the part of the foolish, 
apparent expectation also on the part of the wise. Of both the foolish 
and the wise it is said, “ 
They went forth to meet the bridegroom.” 
But of the foolish it is said, “ 
They took no oil.” There had been 
evident carelessness. Of the wise it is said, they “ 
took oil.” There 
had been reality in their attitudes. 

Yet there is this tremendous difference. Some had no oil. Others 
had the oil burning, and what is the appalling verdict at the end ?
The voice of Jesus saying to those who had lamps, who had expectation, 
but who had taken up only apparently and outwardly, a formof relationship to the absent Bridegroom, “ 
I know you not.” Then 

PARABLES AND MET4PHORS
OF OUR LORD 

=34
those who had the oil went in to the marriage feast-a picture of the 

sifting of Christendom at the conclusion of the age ;
an hour when 

profession, with all its symbols and ritual, devoid of oil and light and 

power, will have no avail ;
an hour when if there have been similar 

provision, and similar symbols, plus the oil that keeps the flame 

burning, these will be the password, and the passport to the marriage 

feast. 

Everything culminates in that final word of Jesus, m
the thirteenth 

verse, “ 
Watch therefore, for ye know not the day nor the hour.” 

What then ?
‘ 
Watch.” What does it mean by watching ?
Does it 

mean that we are for evermore to be talking about the coming of the 

Bridegroom, and affirming our conviction that He is coming ?
No, 

the ten did that. What then is it to watch ?
We must have that 

mystic oil that creates a flame and a light. 

When we begin to interpret that parable we find once more many 

suggestions. So great a father of the Church as Origen said their oil 

consisted of good works. In my judgment that was a breakdown in 

explanation. Martin Luther said that the oil consisted in faith, living 

faith. But was not Grotius right when he said that the oil is the symbol 

of the Holy Spirit ?
I think that is so. Through the Old Testament 

oil is ever the symbol of the Holy Spirit. Whether in the lamp burning

in the Holy Place, or whether in the symbolism of such an one as 

Zechariah ;
whether in all those anointings of the ancient ritual, the 

oil was always typical of the Spirit and of power. Our Lord surely used

this whole parable in that connection, and for that purpose. 

The great word is ‘ 
Watch.” The interpretation of the watchingis having the oil supplied. In the supply of the Spirit of God, and the 
life yielded to that Spirit, and dominated by that Spirit, there is 
always the oil which provides the light. Yes, Origen and Luther were 
partly right in a secondary sense, for where the oil is, there is the Spirit 
of God, there is living faith, and where there is living faith there are 
living works. But the great necessity is that oil that burns. 

“
Behold, the Bridegroom cometh
!
”
When ? The moment we 
ask When, we are in danger. “ 
Ye know not the day nor the hour.” 
It may be before this day closes He will put His pierced hand on all 
these furious world powers, and end them. He is coming to do that.
It may be a thousand years, but a thousand years are only measurements 
of man, and are not in the economy of God. We do not know 
the hour. 

What then are we to do ?
To see to it our lamps are burning, to 
see to it that we have the supply of that oil apart from which there 
is no shining of the light, no flaming light. So the parable of the virgins 
stands there in the midst of a triptych of parables, showing not communal 
responsibilities, not responsibility to my brother ;
not the 
responsibility for the Master’s business in the world ;
but our responsibility, 
my responsibility about myself, about my own life. It is no 

THE TALENTS I35
use my coming to you, and asking you to let me have part of your oil. 
You cannot do it. This is personal and individual. There must be 
that fulness of the Spirit of God in individual life, which produces the 
shining of the light, and the burning of the flame. But at the end there 
will be division, and the Church and the Bridegroom will be revealed, 
while those who have had lamps, and attitudes, and expectations 
intellectually, but have made no living response, to them He will 
say, “ 
I know you not.” 

27. The Talents 
Matthew xxv
:
14-30
T
T
HIS parable of the talents is the third of the triptych of related 
parables concerning the responsibility of His. own through the 
age between the fall of Jerusalem and His second advent. We have 
already considered the parable of the household and that of the 
virgins. One fact, however, is in view in all. .All
those constituting 
the Kingdom of God are under His supreme control. The first 
parable had to do with the household, the Church within itself. 
It was communal, and revealed the responsibilities of individual 
members towards each other, of care and love, with an absence of 
all differences and quarrelling, and biting one another. The next 
parable, that of the virgins, revealed personal responsibility, of 
having not merely an outward form, but of having life. It teaches 
not mereIy
a genera1 expectation of the coming of the Lord, but ofhaving oil, so that the light is burning. 

We come now to the parable dealing with responsibilities of the 
widest nature, the imperial responsibilities of the Church. That at once 
reveals the subject which
our Lord was intending to illustrate when 
He used the parable of the talents. The word imperial is used resolutely, 
though in some ways I do not like it, because in history it has 
bad connotations. The word has come to us from that act in the 
history of Rome when one man seized absolute authority by military 
power, and became imperator of the whole of the Roman empire. 
Things imperial meant the mastery of a people by autocratic and 
military power. Yet because of its true use it has its own and rightful 
place in this connection. Jesus is the only Imperator ;
not Casar, nor 
the kings of time, but Jesus alone. The word connotes a King and a 
Kingdom ;
and the idea contained in the parable, which our Lord wasillustrating, the truth He was enforcing was that of the prosecution 
of the interests of the King by the subjects of the Kingdom, during 
the period of His absence, as to bodily presence. 

He is not absent in the sense of spiritual power. We know what 
it is to walk and talk with Him, and to hear Him talk to us. We know 

136
PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

the real presence of the living Lord. Yet in historic sequence this isthe period of His absence. He was in the world for one brief generation 
of a little more than three and thirty years, the great period in human 
history to which everything else led up, and from which everything 
else of value had proceeded, and is proceeding, and will proceed. 
But He is coming again. No one who believes in the New Testament 
can deny that. The statement is clear that He Who came is coming 
again to the world. All through this Olivet prophecy our Lord was 
looking at the world, and His Church from that standpoint of their 
being in the world, when He, as to bodiIy
presence, was absent, going 
into a far country, and after a long time, coming again. 

This parable must not be confused with that of the Pounds in 
Luke’s Gospel. The emphasis in the two parables is entirely different. 
What then was the figure used here ?
One characterized by the uttermost 
simplicity. The fourteenth verse opens, “
For it is as when a 
man, going into another country.” In the Revised Version the words 
“
it is ”
and “
when ”
are italicized, which means they are not in the 
Greek, but have been put in by translators to give smoothness to the 
statement. Leave them out for a moment, “
For as a man, going into 
another country, called his own servants.” That
links the parable 
closely with what had preceded it. Our Lord did not tarry between 
the parables. We look back then at the parable of the virgins, and the 
whole impact and value is found in the final charge of Jesus in verse 
thirteen. “
Watch therefore, for ye know not the day nor the hour. 
For as a man, going into another country, calleth his own servants, and 
delivereth unto them his goods.” He now illustrated the necessity forwatchfulness, but in another regard. So He takes this simple figure ;
“ 
a man,” He says. With all justness we may say, a king. It is the 
picture of a man who has a country of his own, under his own control. 
He is the lord, the master, the king. In that country this man has 
servants. The word He used all through here was bond-servants, 
slaves. Paul always spoke of himself as doulos,
the bond-servant of 
Jesus Christ, that is, the absolute property of his Lord, all his life forces 
belonging to his Lord, himself at the disposal of his Lord. That is the 
picture here. 

Moreover this man has goods. They belong to him. Change the 
word, wealth, or substance, but not substance stored, but something 
to be dealt with, to be offered for sale. It is a commercial figureconnected with a king, the man who owned a country, and who had 
servants in it, he possessing goods in the country, substance. The 
picture our Lord gives here is of that man leaving behind in the country 
which is his own, these very servants to whom he has distributed 
talents, according to their ability, and leaving them there to trade for 
him, to carry on his business in his absence, to represent his goods to 
those who were left behind, and to put his goods at the disposal of 
others. That is the very simple picture which our Lord used. After a 

THE TALENTS 
long time he comes back, and has a reckoning with the responsible 
servants he has left behind, and three illustrations are given :
to one, 
five ;
to one, two ;
and to one, one talent. 

Look at the picture again. What is the teaching of it ?
That in 
the absence of the Lord He has delivered to His servants His goods. 
He called them His own servants. Mark the emphasis on authority 
and possession, “ 
His own servants,” and He “
delivered unto them His 
goods.” The implication is perfectly clear. The goods were left that 
they might be used for the glory and enrichment of their absent Lord. 
He had goods. The servants were responsible for their use in order 
to bring wealth to Him. Really the relation and suggestiveness of 
these pictures are full of appeal. Goods, our absent Lord, and His 
goods. What are we to sell in this world ?
Do not quarrel about the 
word “ 
goods.” We may say God’s gifts are without money and price. 
But the figure stands good. The apostle used the same figure in a great 
passage in which he told us, not to redeem the time, but to buy up 
the opportunity ;
and in that little word the apostle used of buying 
is the figure of the market-place, and merchant-men sitting by their 
wares, watching for the opportunity, and buying it up. That is the 
idea here. 

What are the goods ?
The whole fact of the mission of Jesus in 
the world, the Gospel ;
and not merely the fact historically, but the 
fact in all its vital power, of the manifestation of God to men in Christ, 
the fact of a ministry full of the revelation of the possibilities of 
humanity in Jesus, the fact that He went to His Cross, and bore the 
sin of the world, the fact that He proved His victory in His dying, 
by His resurrection, the fact that He ascended on high, and receivedgifts for the rebellious, the fact that He is the living Lord, and waiting 
to come in and take possession of human souls, and change them and 
remake them after His own image and likeness. The goods !
The great 
merchandise of the Church of God is concerned with things that belong 
to the Lord Himself, not with their own things, not with their own 
enterprises, not with their own merchandise ;
not with their own 
organizations ;
but with the goods, the wealth of Jesus, purchased at 
infinite cost, and now offered to the sons of men, offered to the whole 
human race. He has left these goods with His servants while He is 
away. 

That leads one to an equally careful though brief considerationof this word “ 
talents.” He gave one five talents. He gave another, 
two talents. He gave one, one talent. What does “
talent ”
mean ?
The popular use of the word suggests ability. We say of someone, 
That is a talented man, or a talented woman ;
and we are describing 
someone who has some gift, some ability. That is not the meaning of 
the word here. It is not a question of whether we have something to 
teach the world in our own personality. The word means something 
quite other. This word talantos,
which we translate “
talent ”
is a 

138
PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

noun rather of quantity, not a revelation of quality. It is a noun of 

quantity, representing the Lord’s possession alone. The five talents 

were His, part of His goods, and so with the two and the one. They 

did not belong to these servants at all. It is not a question of the 

fitness of His people, but one of the riches of His grace, provided for 

humanity in quantity. 

One man was given five talents, another two, and another one. 
Why did one man have five, and the other two, and yet a third, one ?
Why the division ?
We are told, “
To each according to his several 
ability.” We now come to the question of ability. Talents were given 
according to ability. There is a tremendous principle involved in 
that. This does not mean that the man with the five talents had a 
bigger opportunity than the man with the two ;
or the man with the 
two than the man with the one. The personal possession of responsibility 
of some part of the King’s wealth depended upon the ability of 
that particular person to use it. God will give one man, Christ will 
give, the king will give a man so many talents, because he has the 
ability to use that particular amount of the wealth that is committed 
to him. It means this, He will never call a man to preach who has no 
natural ability for preaching. I am afraid we often do. He never does. 
Behind that wonderful little expression, according as each man had 
ability, is a revelation of natural fitness, the ability of the personality 
as preparation for the reception of a supernatural gift, and that is 
always so. If a business man has that ability, he will receive responsibility 
according to that ability, which is his natural ability, the natural 
baptized, empowered, by the supernatural. Do not be led astray by 
the five, and the two, and the one, as though the first marks someelement of greatness, and a kind of inferiority in the next case, and a 
greater inferiority in the third. Not at all. The man is taken into 
account. 

Go to the epistles, and when Paul dealt with gifts, he says, To 
some was given thus, and others so ;
and among the lists, he says,
“ 
He gave some helps,” not tongues, or preaching, or teaching, or 
exposition, or actual ability, but just “ 
helps.” Thank God for those 
in the Christian Church who are helps. But it is according to ability ;
and there is no reflection on the last man because he only received 
one talent. It was according to his ability. The great principle illustrated 
is that of his disbursement of his goods to his bond-servants. 
That they may fulfil the responsibility of carrying out his enterprises 
during his absence, he gives to each man severally as he will, five, 
two, one ;
according as a man was able to use the five, or the two, or 
the one. According to his several ability ;
the natural creating fitnessfor the supernatural. 

Then the Lord showed how these men used these things. The one 
who had five produced other five, a hundred per cent. The one who 
had the two produced other two. How much is that ?
Fifty per cent. ?
THE TALENTS 
No, a hundred per cent. The second did as well as the first. The man 

with the one had a wrong estimate of his master, which was entirely

false, as an excuse for inactivity. He took his talent and hid it in a 

napkin and buried it, and he said he did it because his lord was hard

and unjust, reaping where he did not sow. Inactivity !
One talent 

committed to him. If he had traded with it, and that talent had

produced one, then it would have been as good as the man with the

two, or the man with the five talents. It would have been one

hundred per cent. But this man had done nothing with his lord’s 

possession. Nothing was brought to the Iord by the use of his

talent. 

The issue is perfectly simple and plain. Notice carefully two verses.

Verse 21. “
His lord said unto him, Well done, good and faithful

servant ;
thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will set thee

over many things :
enter thou into the joy of thy lord.” Verse 23. 

“
His lord said unto him, Well done, good and faithful servant ;
thou 

hast been faithful over a few things, I will set thee over many things:
enter thou into the joy of thy lord.” There
is no difference of a word. 

They show what Jesus said of the man with five talents and of the

man with two was exactly the same. The approbation of the

two men is identical, ‘
Well done.” “
Well done.” My masters!
Jesus will never say “
Well done ”
to anyone unless it has been

well done. 

Then mark it well, I
enter thou into the joy of thy lord.“ Share 
with Me in the joy that comes from thy use of My goods in the world,
the substance that I entrusted to you. So do not be foolish enough towish we had five talents if He has given us two, or that we had twowhen He has given us one. Have we got one ?
Has He entrusted 
US with one ?
Have we got some portion of the Master’s goods that isour special responsibility for other men, one, two, five ?
Then see to 
it we make full use of His goods entrusted to our care. The wholestory teaches us this, that the final question is not one of greatness ofopportunity, but faithfulness, fidelity to the opportunity that has beengranted.

We need not tarry with the man with the one talent, although itis a very tragic story. He lied about his lord, and the lord refutedthat lie by repeating it to him. One cannot read the words without 
catching the note of irony, of satire, as he spoke to him. “
Thou 
wicked and slothful servant.” Then come the words of refutation. 
Is that what you knew, that I reaped where I did not sow, and gatherwhere I did not scatter ? Is that your estimate ? Well,
if you thinkthat way, you might have put my money to the bankers, and at leastI should have had interest on my return. It is so conclusive, and sorevolutionary.

These were all the servants of the lord, and it is possible to havefive talents, and bury them, and the two talents, and bury them as did 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

the man who had the one talent. He did not bury it because he only 
had one. He buried it because in his own soul he had a false thought 
about his master. Then he lied at the end, and gave it as an excuse ;
and the lord said, Take it away from him, and give it to the man who 
has ten taIents,
and cast him into the darkness outside, the darkness 
that is outside the Kingdom of responsibility. 

It is important that we keep these three parables in connection 
with each other. They reveal the threefold responsibility of the Church. 
First, communal responsibility, right behaviour among all its members, 
the ending of all malice and unkindness ;
to use the figure-beating 
one another. Then the personal responsibility, that we have far more 
than a name, far more than a torch, far more than a wick which can 
be dim, if it has become encrusted. We must have oil that keeps the 
light burning. Finally, imperial responsibility, our responsibility for 
the goods of the Lord, for the enterprises of Christ in the world. 
In each case the responsibility is defined by our relationship to Him. 
True to Him, the household is always at peace. Waiting for Him, the 
lamps are always burning. Working for Him, the Kingdom is hastened, 
and the glory is brought to His name. 

28.
Sheep and Goats 
Matthew xxv
:
31-46 

IN THESE parabolic illustrations of the sheep and the goats we shall 
principally be concerned with all that our Lord was intending to 
illustrate by those figures. They occur in this third and last section 
of the Olivet prophecy. In order to correct interpretation we must 
first remember the relatronships
between the sections, and to the whole 
message of the Gospel in which it is found. Secondly, we must be 
careful not to read into this part of our Lord’s prophecy, and especially 
into His parabolic illustration, any of the things which are not truly 
found in it. We are in danger of doing this, especially with regard to 
this story and illustration. When those safeguards are observed, we 
shall be free to catch the true meaning of the remarkable passage, 
and to examine the process which it so vividly describes. 
The parabolic figure of sheep and goats here is used in application 
to finality. Finality of what ?
That question will be answered as we 
look carefully. Consider the relation of this section (xxv. 31-46),
to 
the whole of this Olivet prophecy. In answering His enquiring disciplesHe had first looked down the coming age and uttered a prophecy 
specially dealing with the Hebrew people, which found its culmination 
in the destruction of Jerusalem, fulfilled within a little more than 
a generation after He had uttered the words. Then in the second 
section (xxiv. 45-xxv.
30) our Lord was specially dealing with the 

SHEEP AND GOATS 
responsibilities of His Church between the first and second advents. 

IVe
have seen these responsibilities, communal, personal, and imperial. 

Now in the last part of the prophecy He deals with the nations. It is 

not the Hebrew people as a nation. That nation He had rejected from 

its place in the economy of God. It is not now the spiritual nation, 

the Church, with which He had been dealing as to responsibility. It is 

now the nations of the world. In this last section He is looking on to 

the consummation, and the things that will happen then with regard 

to the kingdoms of the world. 

In each of these sections of the prophecy His second advent was 
evidently in His mind. It is always there, recurring. The first section 
ended with the charge, “
Be ye also ready, for in an hour that ye think 
not the Son of man cometh.
The second, in three pictures, deals with 
the return of the absent Lord. The Lord of the household comes to 
enquire into communal responwbility
;
the bridegroom arrives to 
meet those who have expected him ;
and the owner of the goods comes 
for a reckoning with those who have received talents. 

Now this section commences with the reference with which the 
others close. “ 
But when the Son of man shall come in His glory.” 
He is dealing now with the second advent as the starting-point, and 
giving the happenings immediately connected with that advent. He 
describes the effect of His second advent on national affairs in this 
world. 

Notice how Matthew, this remarkable chronicler of the King, has 
proceeded, and here reaches a great climax. This is the Gospel of the 
Kingdom, and of the Kingdom of heaven. The opening movement 
presents the King. From that there follows the description of theKing’s propaganda. His enunciation of an ethic, the sermon on the 
mount ;
the exhibition of the benefits of the Kingdom, as He moved 
amid derelict humanity, healing need, whether physical, moral, or 
mental ;
and then enforcing His claims in opposition to those of His 
foes. The hour was coming when He was moving towards rejection, 
but He was moving towards an ultimate victory. It is that ultimate 
victory that is here revealed in this final section of the Olivet prophecy. 
In Matthew, the ultimate victory is not seen in heaven, but on earth. 
That does not mean the ultimate things are not the heavenly things, 
and things in the ages to come. They certainly are, but that is not the 
theme here, and it is not the theme in this particular discourse. 

The laws of the Kingdom, in the sermon on the mount, are for 
earthly conditions, not for heavenly. They do not apply to a heavenly 
state, and condition of a life after this. They all apply to the present 
life. As we watch the King moving in Kingly power and compassion 
and majesty amid dereIict
humanity, that does not mean an exhibition 
of the powers of the Kingship of Jehovah in the heavenly realms that 
lie beyond. It is an exhibition of His power on this earthly level. So 
as He enforced His claims all the way, they consisted of His claims 

I42
PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

upon the earth. Thai prayer which we designate the Lord’s prayer 
moved on two realms. The first had to do with man’s relationship to 
God, and the second, man’s necessities on the earth level, and man’s 
interrelationship on the earth. He taught His disciples to pray, ”
Our 
Father, which art in the heaven, Thy name be hallowed, Thy Kingdom 
come, Thy will be done on earth as in heaven.” The passion of that 
prayer does not ask that men may find their way to heaven one day, 
but that God may win the earth, and that the earth may find itself 
in the Kingdom of God. The earth is in view. 

In this gospel of Matthew (xxvi.-xxviii.) we have the final mission 
and commission, and again I take a slightly altered translation, which 
is more accurate. Mark the voice of the King. “
All authority is given 
unto Me in heaven and on earth ;
go ye therefore and disciple the 
nations.” Disciple whom ?
All the nations. As they come under the 
influence, and obey it, then I
baptizing them into the name of the 
Father and the Son and of the Holy Spirit.” But it is “ 
all the nations.” 
It is on the earth level. Do not imagine that takes any dignity and 
glory from this. It does not interfere with the larger meaning of the 
work of Christ, as it includes the ages to come, to use Paul’s poetic 
language, “ 
unto the generation of the age of the ages.” Have you 
ever sat down in front of that, and tried to measure it ?
The first 
concern of our King is the establishment in this world of the order 
harmonizing with the heavenly order. 

All this is of supreme importance to our understanding of the 
events to which this prophecy refers. Certain events must be excluded 
from our thinking. This is not a picture of the Great Assize,
not of the great white Throne. That account is given in Revelation,
“
I saw a great white Throne, and Him that sat upon it, from Whose 
face the earth and the heaven fled away.” Then the dead are raised, 
and stand before Him. There is nothing here about a great white 
Throne. The Son of man is here, not so much as the final Judge, 
but as the King in authority. Earth and heaven are not fled away 
here. The earth level is in our view. There is no resurrection of the 
dead. The nations referred to are living nations. Our Lord was 
Iooking on, as He had done all through His Olivet prophecy, to the 
consummation of the age, showing what it will mean in the case of 
the nations. 

What then are the facts revealed ?
First of all we see the Son of 
man on the Throne of His glory, and it is a regal throne. He is the 
King. ”
The King shall say ”
;
He is speaking of Himself as King, 
when He comes with His angels, at the consummation of the age. 
He is coming. When He comes, He will sit on the throne of His 
glory. Watch the movement with sanctified imagination, and draw 
the picture. He is seen assuming the reins of earthly government, 
and doing it openly. By doing this He is eliminating all other rulers. 
No other ruler is in sight. There is no king, president, or dictator 

SHEEP AND GOATS 

I43
in sight ;
but He is gathering all the nations. It is not a question of 

multitudes of men and women. It is a great gathering of nations, 

and He is seen administering the affairs of an earthly kingdom. This 

is the picture of the initial process of the new administration of 

earth’s affairs. Not the great white Throne, not even the Judgment 

Seat of Christ, before which all believers must appear. As Paul says, 

we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ. When we 

appear under that glance of fire, then all that is unworthy will be 

destroyed, and the fire will burnish to beauty everything holy. This .
is a picture of the King enthroned, laying His pierced hand upon the 

world affairs, and bringing them to finality, as He moves toward the 

establishment of the Kingdom of God in this world. 

What do we see at the centre of everything ? The Son of man on 
His throne. Here our minds necessarily go back over all
the ground. 
The title “
Son of man ”
was His own familiar designation of Himself 
in the days of His flesh. That is the first thing we see ;
the Son of 
man enthroned, exercising His authority. Then all the nations are 
gathered around that Throne, which again means, not necessarily 
that all the people of all the world are so gathered into one spot, 
although that would not be difficult. All the population of the world 
could stand together on the Isle of Wight, for instance. That is 
only a passing reference. When we think about the League of Nations, 
that does not mean all the nations are gathered together at Geneva. 
The King is seen calling together every nation, possibly through its 
representatives. While not stressing it, it is worth noting. All the 
nations are there, and are gathered. There is the cancellation of 
differences. Old national lines which have characterized us are obliterated. 
Whatever the forms of government may have been, and 
however they may be changed, when the Son of man sits on the 
Throne of His glory, they will all be arraigned before Him. The very 
gathering suggests His authority. 

Take this parabolic illustration. If the gathering cancels the 
old lines of division, there immediately follows a new division, a 
new separation. The nations are not treated
on the basis of race, or 
of political position, or occupation, or achievement, or failure and 
disaster. They are divided into sheep and goats, a division of the 
nations, a new separation. The old national lines are obliterated 
before the King; to His right and left hand, sheep and goats. 

Look next particularly at the sentences and the verdicts. To 
those on the right he says, Come, enter the Kingdom. That is not 
heaven ;
that is the new order on earth ;
when the prayer that we 
pray that the Kingdom of God may come on earth as in heaven, is 
answered on the earth level. Enter the Kingdom, not heaven, but 
the earthly order.

But on what basis ?
He now comes to that word so full of infinite 
meaning. “
I was an hungered .. .
I was thirsty . . . I
was a 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

stranger .
.
.
I 
was sick , . . I was in prison.” The astonished 
people on the right say to Him, When were these things so ?
Now 
mark His answer with great care. It is the same answer, by contrast, 
to those on the right and on the left. They say, “
When ? ... 
When 1
”
“ 
Verily I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye did it,” or “
did 
it not,” ”
unto one of these My brethren, even these least, ye did it .
unto Me,” or “ 
ye did it not unto Me.” What a marvellously
revealing 
thing to say. 

But let us understand it. Some say He was talking about the 
Jews. That is a strange view. Go back in the Gospel to an earlier 
period (xii. 46),
“While He was yet speaking to the multitudes, 
behold, His mother and His brethren stood without, seeking to speak 
to Him.” While He was yet speaking, “
But He answered and said 
unto him that told Him, Who is My mother ? 
and who are My 
brethren ?
and He stretched forth His hand towards His disciples, 
and said, Behold, My mother and My brethren !
For whosoever shall 
do the will of My Father which is in heaven, he is my brother, and 
sister, and mother.” We cannot confine this scene of infinite majesty 
to that small and foolish idea that He was talking about the Jews 
when He said “ 
My brethren.” Who are “
My brethren ”
? He had 
told us who they were. Those who do the will of His Father. He 
was including all Jews, all Hebrews who did the will of His Father, 
but He was including all Gentiles also. He is looking down this 
whole age from the standpoint of our responsibility ;
and He sees 
them going out, His spiritual brethren, His Kin, mother, brother, 
sister ;
multitudes of them bringing His strength and comfort and 
help in every way ;
and He says at last to the nations, I cane whenthey came, and I came through suffering. I have passed down the 
age in these My brethren, and if you have failed to receive them, you 
have failed to receive MC ;
and in failing to receive
them
and to 
receive Me you have proved your unfitness for the newly established 
Kingdom of God. Thus to those on the left hand He has said exactly 
the same thing, only from the other side. Thus He was showing that 

nations will be admitted to the inheritance of the Kingdom of God, 
established upon the earth, upon the basis of their attitude to Christ 
Himself, as He has been represented to them through His people 
during the whole period. 

Look at this more particularly. This is how the nations are to 
be judged. It is Pilate’s question asked over again from the nationalstandpoint. Pilate said, What shall I do with Jesus ?
It is the question 
for the nations. What are they doing with Jesus ? What are theydoing with His message ? What are they doing with His messengers9
What are they doing with all the spiritual forces and moral powers 
that He has set at liberty, and which are at work through His per,ple
in the age ?
Upon the basis of that, His judgment will be found for 
or against them. The tremendous thing in that great division is that 

THE GROWTH OF THE SEED I45
the righteous shall enter upon age-abiding life, and the wicked upon 

age-abiding fire. It is a national division. 

We must stop there, because there He stopped. We can go beyond 

it, and try and find out what it means. It is the initiation of that 

Kingdom in human history. It is not finality. Finality is never 

reached until this has first taken place. He will be the Dictator. If 

I am asked to-day, Do you really think this is coming ? I answer, 

Certainly it is coming. If I did not believe it I would lose all heart 

and hope. I am sure it is coming. When ?
No, my friend, you must 

not ask that, because He has told us distinctly-He told these disciples 

in this prophecy,-we are not to know the When. 

This section of the prophecy then describes in broad outline, and 

as an underlying principle, how the King will personally-to quote 

words He used in the earlier parables-“ gather out of His Kingdom 

all things that cause stumbling, and them that do iniquity ”
;
and 

thus prepare for that new era, in which, again to quote His words, 

“
the righteous shall shine forth as the sun in the Kingdom of His 

Father.” 

This picture flashes its light back upon the previous section, and 
reveals part of our responsibility with new force
and power. Within 
the household we are to be obedient to the absent Lord, and love one 
another. As individuals we are ever to have lamps trimmed and 
burning, waiting for the Advent. As His representatives in the world 
we are to prosecute His commerce with the talents He has committed 
to us. Or in brief, witnessing for Him, and so creating the opportunity 
of the nations, in the work of the Christian Church, and thus preparing 
the way for that final discrimination when the Son of man shall comein His glory. 

29. The Growth of the Seed 
Mark iv :
26-29
IT IS certainly an arresting fact that this parable is only recorded by 
Mark, and it is peculiar therefore to His Gospel. He records others 
of the parables, and some of the parabolic illustrations found in the 
Gospel of Matthew. 
A certain amount of wonder and speculation is permissible, providing 
it is not carried too far. Why has only Mark given this parable ?
I do not know, but one does wonder, especially because of its remarkable 
value, a value that no other parable had which Jesus uttered 
concerning the Kingdom. It assumes the teaching of the other parables, 
and so is arresting that Mark has recorded it. Perhaps it specially 
impressed Mark because of his own character. His was an interesting 
personality. Paul and Barnabas had a difference of opinion concerning 
TO 

146
PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

him, so definite a quarrel that they parted company. Paul may have

been right that Mar-k was vacillating, that when he went back at

Pamphylia, there was some element of weakness in his character. To 

give a personal opinion, if Paul were. right, my sympathy is with

Barnabas. He kept Mark with him, and gave him another chance.

That is a better attitude. Perhaps this parable therefore gripped Mark,

and came back to him in after years, that marvellous parable revealing

the necessity for patience, first the blade and then the ear, and then

the full corn in the ear. 

We do not know why only Mark has recorded this parable ;
and 
moreover, there is nothing to show definitely when it was uttered.
Undoubtedly it was given on that first day of parabolic discourse.
The thirtieth verse begins, “
And He said, How shall we liken the 
Kingdom of God ?
or in what parable shall we set it forth ? It is like 
a grain of mustard seed.” There Mark records one of the parablesJesus gave on that great day of parabolic utterance, recorded fully byMatthew in this thirteenth chapter. Mark does say, “
With many suchparables spake Jesus the word unto them, as they were able to hearit ;
and without a parable spake He not unto them ;
but privatelyto His own disciples He expounded all things.” So it is possible thatthis little parable was spoken on that self-same day. It is even possiblethat it was spoken on the first day of parabolic discourse between othersthat are closely related to it, possibly after the parable of the sower thatwent forth to sow, and before the parable of the wheat and thedarnel,
showing the two sowings going forward ;
and so leading on to thatof the mustard seed, which Mark also records. More than that cannot 
possibly be said, except that we pause to notice the similarity of thebasic ideas in this group of parables. In every one of them is the seedcontaining potentialities, but needing to be sown. In every one wehave growth, development, consequent upon sowing, and in every onethere is harvest, the result of the development, consequent uponthe sowing.

The central matter in this little parable is that of growth. Sowingis recognized. Harvest is also recognized, but the teaching concernsthe process between the sowing and the harvest. If we have all those 
parables in mind, and remember how our Lord had likened the Kingdomunder these changing and yet similar figures of speech, we are preparedto approach this. Following our method, let us look at the figurewhich our Lord here employed.

It is a perfectly natural one, and therefore absolutely necessary.
A man sows seed. Notice how our Lord says this. “
So is the Kingdomof God as if ”
;
“
So . . . as if a man should cast seed upon the earth.”
Then, when this man has sown the seed, he goes on with his ordinarylife. There is nothing reprehensible in this. It is “
as if a man should 
cast seed upon the earth and should sleep and rise “-two periods oftime, “ 
night and day.” Night for sleep ;
day for rising, which means 

THE ,GROWTH
OF THE SEED I47
activity. What is the man doing in the picture ?
He has sown his seed,
and then he goes on with his ordinary life. Quite properly he goes tosleep at night, and rises in the morning. He carries on. 
Meanwhile, what he has done in sowing the seed, is being carriedforward without his help. I
And the seed should spring up and grow,
he knoweth not how.” Mark that carefully, for we shall return to itin another connection. What does happen ?
“
The earth beareth of 
herself.” The man is doing nothing. He cannot do anything. Hehas done something. He has sown the seed, but there is no more hecan do yet. He goes to sleep, and goes on with his ordinary life ;
but 
all the while in that period, when he can do no more, something is going 
on. The seed is springing and growing ;
he does not know how, andit “
beareth fruit.” “
The earth bringeth forth of herself.”
What is he to do ? Watch. “
First the blade.” We have all seen 
this in the country ;
and that goes on, until we see the ear, and thatgoes on until we see “
the full corn,” ripeness and maturity. All this 
time, the man who has sown the seed is doing nothing with regard towhat he has sown. He has done his duty. He has sown the seed. He 
goes to sleep, and he rises, in night and day, but there is no cessationin the activity resulting from what he has done, though he is not nowacting. The result of what he has done is that the seed is springing,
growing, developing, and it is coming quietly, first the blade, then theear, and then the full corn in the ear. There are certain laws andforces inherent in the seed and in the soil. In the seed is a principleof life. That principle is in every seed. There are forces of life inthe soil, and these forces of life in the soil, in co-operation with theforces of life in the seed, produce a result, and produce it quietly ;
and 
presently, ”
first the blade, then the ear,” and then the full growth.
Take the whole, and see a wonderful co-operation between manand Nature. Nature cannot sow, and it cannot reap. Man cannotgive the increase. The figure is everything in this parable. It carries 
its own lesson. The marvellous forcefulness of this grips us. In thefirst great parable, the sower went forth to sow. Whereas the one Sower 
was the Lord Himself, He is not the Sower here, because the figuresays that the man does not know how the growth is going on. He 
cannot help it, and cannot do anything about it. That is not true of 
the Lord. It is true of us, and of everyone called into co-operation withHim in sowing seed. We know what the seed is. We have had the 
figure in other parables. The seed is the Word. 
We have a wonderful figure here. We need not go to the East forthis. We can look at it in our own land anywhere. A man goes forthto sow, and when he has done his sowing there is no more he can do.
He must wait, but there is no cessation of activity. There is an activityresulting from his sowing. The seed he sows has fallen upon the soil,
and the earth brings forth fruit of itself. Then presently, 
He clothes the smiling fields with corn,” 

148
PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

How do they come ?
Not golden harvest yet ;
but “ 
first the blade,” 

and what a wonderful picture it is, a field, when that first blade is 

appearing, the shimmer of its emerald green from end to end. Watch 

it, until presently the ear is at the head of every stalk. Wait a little 

while longer, and it is ripe. Then the man comes back, and does some
thing. Then he puts in his sickle. Now the earth cannot produce a 

harvest unless the seed is sown ;
and the man cannot produce a harvest 

unless he sows the seed ;
but having sown the seed he has to wait,

and wait patiently for all those processes of Nature which result 

presently in germination, growth, development, and finally harvest. 

What a wonderful parable it is, in the midst of the rest. We cannot 

understand it in any true way unless we keep it in relation to the 

others, especially the first, the one Sower going forth to sow. In 

Matthew’s account of the Kingdom parables, the seed sown was the 

Word of God incarnate in human lives. When Luke gave the account 

of that parable, as I believe on another
occasion, he distinctly said 

the seed is the Word of God. But whether the Word in essence, or the 

Word incarnate in human beings, men and women, sons and daughters 

of the Kingdom, the great principle is the Word of God. Do not forget, 

“So is the Kingdom.” Here we see those who are His, carrying out 

this self-same work of scattering the seed. “ 
So is the Kingdom.” 

That is how it begins, how it always begins. 

The application is evidently to us in this sense, because He is 
not ignorant as to the Izow.
This man does not understand, but the 
great revelation of this parable is our Lord’s teaching about the 
Kingdom, and about Himself as the Sower, and about the Word of 
God, the life principle out of which all the true activities and results 
must grow. 

This parable therefore teaches first of all the necessity for sowing. 
That has been said in other ways in looking at the figure. There must 
be this sowing of the seed. The earth will produce no harvest of itself. 
What harvest ?
The Kingdom of God, His rule, His reign, His triumph 
over all human affairs. For the bringing in of that harvest the seed 
must be sown. That is the first teaching. The man casts seed upon 
the earth. The earth produces no harvest from itself. 

Then to me at least this is always the true impact of this parable, 
the necessity for patience, because of this inability in the actual realm 
of life. We can take the life principle of the Word of God and scatter 
it. That is our duty, whether we do it by preaching or teaching or 
living, which is potent also. We can do that, sow the seed, and that 
is all. Paul may plant, Apollos water, but it is God Who gives the 
increase. We need to be reminded of this. That does not say that 
man has nothing to do. It only reveals the point at which man’s doing 
must cease, and in which he must exercise patience. Man can help or 
hinder. Man helps by ploughing up the fallow ground by all those 
processes that prepare for the scattering of the seed. In a thousand 

THE GROWTH OF THE SEED 
ways we can help. All that is preparatory to the one thing, the scattering 
of the seed. We can hinder. Man can even in his folly trampleupon the blade as it appears, and crush it out ere it have time todevelop. All that is admitted. Interference may be destructive, butman cannot produce a harvest. Man cannot produce a harvest evenby the sowing of the Word of God. In a sense his very sowing is preparing 
for harvest, but all this is an unveiling of the necessity for 
standing still, and being patient. The co-operation of life forces outside 
himseIf
produces harvest.

Let us be very practical about that. Are we not in danger ofwanting to see results too soon, and too quickly from our sowing?
Have we learned the secret of the husbandman who hath patienceas he waits “ 
for the precious fruit of the earth,” that great declarationof one of the epistles concerning God ?
-We
are all in danger of doingwhat some of us did when we were children, when we were given alittle plot of garden. We dug it and got the soil ready ; we planted ourseeds, and in a week or two we were digging them up to see how theywere getting on !
We are very much given to digging up what wehave planted, instead of resting content to scatter the seed, and leaveit to the forces of God to bring in the harvest.

And yet there is a necessity for reaping. When the full harvest 
is there, when the manifestation is there that the sowing of the seedhas produced this process of development, the blade and ear and fullcorn, then the harvest. In that sense we may take this parable andapply it as to the Sower, as to the Lord Himself, although primarilyit was intended for those working for Him. He has patience, andwaits for the precious fruit of the earth, and how patient He is. But 
the harvest will come. Then His sickle will be put in.

I am more concerned with the application of the parable to ourselves, 
and the first of all to our work. We do want harvest. Jesus 
said, “ 
The fields are white already to harvest.” What fields ?
Fields 
that others have sown before us. We may never reap from our sowinghere, it may be, or perchance we may. But the fields are white with 
the sowing of those who have gone before, in a myriad ways ;
and 
whereas we may always be sowing, we may always be putting in thesickle to reap. But that which we reap has not come suddenly. That 
also had its sowing, and it is the development through blade and earuntil that harvest came. As Jesus looked out He saw harvest everywhere, 
“ 
The harvest is plenteous, but the labourers are few.” “
Put 
in the sickle,” He said on two memorable occasions ;
and so is it to-day,
and so it is everywhere.

What is our relation to this whole process within the work of theKingdom of God ?
First of all activity, sowing the seed. Let us bevery careful we are sowing the right seed, and the only seed that willbring forth the fruit of the Kingdom of God in this world, the seedof the Word of God. I should not like to say that conviction about 

150
PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

that has gone out of date ;
but it has weakened within the processes 
of the last generation or more. Whatever opinion I may have of it 
does not matter finally. There is no doubt, however, that He is calling 
us to a tremendous work, the supreme sufficiency of the Word 
of God. Let us see to it that we are sowing the right seed in life and 
in teaching. 

What next ?
A sense of our helplessness in the matter of the 
germination of the seed. No, we cannot do that. We scatter it, and 
then we stand aside. To quote it again. Paul may plant. Paul must 
plant, and Apollos may attend to irrigation, as he waters. I go further, 
and say he must do it. But there is a process that Paul cannot help 
in, and that Apollos cannot serve. It is God’s work ;
and it is great 
to learn to be patient with God. 

Then in conclusion we may apply it to individual life. Do not be 
impatient about your own life. I know it is almost a dangerous thing 
to say because some people are careless. On the other hand, I meet so 
many people who are impatient
with themselves when God is patient 
with them. Do not forget, first the blade, and if that is there, life is 
there ;
and if life is there, there is the promise of growth and development. 
Do not be impatient. Do not dig the blade up to see what is 
happening. Leave it alone. Then the ear, and that proves the process 
is happening, and we wait a little longer, and there is the full corn 
in the ear. No, not on a sudden, in a moment is this great work of 
the Kingdom of God completed in any human soul. Yes, suddenly, 
in a moment it begins, when the seed falls upon the soil. Let us 
recognise
then that which makes it grow and develop is the action of 
God. Let us see to it we do not hinder that, but yield ourselves to-the 
life forces that are ours by faith in the Word of the living God. Let us 
wait for the full ear, and the richness of the harvest. 

PART II 

30. The Two Debtors 
Luke vii :
41-43 

L
L
UKE 
is rich in parables and parabolic illustrations peculiar to his 
narrative. There are no fewer than eighteen. 
In order to understand the subject our Lord intended to illustratewhen He used this parable of the two debtors we must have its setting. 
The story is well known. In it we see three persons :
Simon, who 
invited Jesus into his house to dinner ;
the woman who, as Simon 
would have said, invaded the sanctity of his house ;
and Jesus. 

We give attention first to Simon, and notice what he was thinking 
in his heart. We understand the cause of his thinking, and find that 
in the parable the Lord was revealing the reason for what Simon saw 
that perplexed him. There was no cordiality in the invitation which 
he extended, because when he received Jesus, he neglected all the 
common courtesies of an Eastern home. He brought no water 
for His feet, no oil for His head, he gave Him no kiss of salutation 
;
all which were things of common courtesy in an Eastern 
home. He simply asked Him to come in, and Jesus went in, and 
sat down to meat. 

Then Simon saw a very strange happening. Luke with fine delicacyemploys the phrase ” 
a woman . . . a sinner.” The word is the 
synonym for a harlot. Simon saw a prostitute, to use the blunt word, 
suddenly cross his threshold. There is no need to emphasize the fact 
that she had never been there before. No man like Simon, cold and 
dispassionate, moral, upright, and conceited, need be afraid that kind 
of woman is coming near
him !
Simon saw her come in and go round the 
board, and stooping behind Jesus shed tears over His feet, then with 
loosened tresses of her hair wiping them, smothering them with kisses, 
and pouring on them precious ointment. Simon saw this, and it 
perplexed him. 

Now what did Simon see ?
He saw this woman manifesting andgiving evidences of great devotion and of affection towards Jesus, 
and he associated what he saw with what he knew of the woman. He 
knew who she was, knew what her story was ;
and when he saw a 
woman of that character come into his house, and give evidences of 
tremendous affection for Jesus, and devotion to Him, he measured 
the action by what he knew of the woman. 

Jesus accepted those evidences of affection and devotion, He 

15
I.52
PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 
allowed her to do what she did. He did not forbid her. Simon said 

if He were a prophet He would have known who and what manner of 

woman she was. That was Simon’s outlook. Jesus accepted it. Simon 

associated what he saw with what he knew of the woman. Jesus 

accepted the devotion and affection because He associated these things 

with what He knew of the woman. The whole story shows what 

Simon knew, and what Jesus knew. Our Lord presently asked Simon 

if he really knew the woman. Notice the two little sentences. Simon 

said, “
If He were a prophet He would have perceived who, and what 

manner of woman this is that toucheth Him.” Presently Jesus said 

to him, “
Simon, seest tlzou
this woman ? ”
Then He proceeded to show 

the woman to Simon, and He did so by comparing her with him, and 

He showed-to put the matter bluntly-that by comparison with 

her, Simon with all his boasted morality,
was as coarse as sackcloth, 

and she was fine as fine-spun silk. ‘That is the background. 

What was Jesus showing by the use of this parable ?
He was 
showing that this woman was a cleansed woman, a forgiven woman. 
He did not pronounce forgiveness then, but as something already 
accomplished. The tense of the verb is, “ 
hath been forgiven.” He 
was showing Simon this one thing, for I believe He was trying to 
reach the soul of Simon. This leads us to the parable, which teaches 
that moral cleansing is the inspiration of devotion, and of beauty. 
That summarizes everything at the beginning as to the circumstances 
under which the parable was spoken, and the subject which the 
parable was intended to illustrate. 

Take the parable, remembering the narrative. Jesus said, “
A 
certain lender,” and the word is a money-lender. They existed then,
and still exist. “
A certain money-lender had two debtors; the one 
owed five hundred pence, and the other fifty. When they had not 
wherewith to pay, he forgave them both. Which of them therefore 
will love him most 1
Simon answered and said, He, I suppose “
and the word there suggests a rather supercilious attitude-“ He, I 
suppose, to whom he forgave the most.” The Master said, “
Thou 
hast rightly judged.” 

Look then at this figure our Lord employed. It is strictly a commercial 
one, money, debtors, and creditors ;
and in each case the 
inevitable conclusion is that the debts had been incurred through 
need. This money-lender had advanced to one fifty pence, and tothe other, five hundred. The proportion of fifty to five hundred is the 
important thing. To translate into the English equivalent is not easy. 
There were debts, and the degree of obligation is marked by the 
difference in the amount, between fifty and five hundred. It is a commercial 
picture, quite usual, happening often enough in that country, 
still happening too. The advance had come from the same source, 
and it had gone to two people in the same condition of need, and 
they were both still in the same condition that they had nothing with 

THE TWO DEBTORS I53
which to pay, They were both bankrupt ;
they owed the debt, but 
they could not pay it. 

Then our Lord introduced into His parable something extraordinary, 
almost unusual. What is it ?
That the money-lender forgave 
them both. Do not miss that, because there flashes a light of 
the Divine, there beams the glory of the grace of God. Keep to the 
figure for a moment, the cancellation of obligation in both cases, the 
fifty wiped out, the five hundred wiped out !
It
was a purely gratuitous 
act on the part of the creditor, on the ground only of the bankruptcy 
of the debtors. I think Simon must have been astonished 
when he heard the story at that point. The creditor cancels the debts 
of the debtors, which was something quite unusual ;
and from that 
fact He asked this question, Which of them is likely to love him the 
most? He did not use the prerogative which was his, and take the 
usual course of events, which follows a personal indebtedness to a 
creditor. He cancelled the debts. 

What had Simon to say to that ?
What he Nould
say is so obvious. 
I think with a touch of superciliousness he said, “
I suppose, he to 
whom he forgave the most.” Quickly and sharply came the word of 
Jesus, “ 
Thou hast rightly judged.” The greater the obligation the 
greater the sense of gratitude when the obligation is cancelled. We 
see much of infinite beauty gleaming in this wonderful parabIe.
I 
see in the parable itself, in the mind of our Lord, a tender satire for 
Simon. I think He was accepting Simon’s valuation of his own degree 
of guilt at fifty, and that of the woman at five hundred. He took 
figures that revealed the working of Simon’s mind. Simon was a 
Pharisee, and therefore an orthodox Jew. Simon would have admitted 
he was a sinner, but would thank God that he was not such a sinner 
as that woman. How wonderfully things persist. Our Lord said He 
would take him at his valuation. You are the fifty pence sinner, 
and the woman the five hundred pence. Ten times she owes as thou 
dost. On his valuation He took him ;
but as a matter of fact, there 
are no such degrees in sin. Sin is rebehion
against, and unlikeness of 
God, whether the form be that of the hypocrite as Simon was, or the 
form of a fallen woman, such as the one who came into his house. 
The essence of sin was rebellion against the law and will of God, and 
contradiction of the heart of God. That is sin, and there is no such 
thing as degrees of guilt. Or even if we should admit degrees, then 
considering this whole story, Simon’s sin was greater than the woman’s, 
for do not forget this, that the sins of the spirit are always more 
heinous than the sins of the flesh. The sins of the spirit, pride, self-
satisfaction, are more deadly to human life than the sins of the flesh 
ever were, or can be. So the parable Jesus used. 

What does the parable teach us by implication ?
I begin at the 
heart of it. First of all, the bankruptcy of all men when they stand 
in the presence of God. We are all His debtors, but we have 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD

‘54 

nothing to pay, not one of us. In the words of our hymnology,
often sung, 

 
Nothing in my hands I bring.” 
Why not ? We have nothing to bring. We have nothing with which

we can pay the debt we owe to God, consequent upon a violated law,

and sin in our lives, whether of the spirit or the flesh, matters nothing.

This parable, sharp-cut as a cameo as we ponder it, brings us face to 

face with the fact that the sentence on every one of us morally is that

we have nothing to pay, nothing sufficient to meet our obligations.

Then if that is the great central truth, by implication there is

another amazing thing. There is forgiveness for all. He forgave them

both. Behind that there is so much that cannot be said, but must be 

remembered. I do not know who this money-lender was, but even the

parable of Jesus fails, as all parables do, to utter the ultimate truth.

He forgave them both. Mel Trotter has said an arresting thing. “
We 

are all redeemed, but we are not all saved,” an important distinction.

When Jesus died, He did not die for me alone, but for the world, and

the Cross provided redemption for the world, that which makes it

possible for God to forgive. “ 
He forgave them both.” This money
lender lost not much more than 550
pence, more than &
in our 

currency all told ; 
but in order to provide humanity’s need in its deep

necessity, in its bankruptcy, God gave His only begotten Son. That

is not in the parable, but it is implicated. “ 
He forgave them both,”

forgiveness for me, for you, and that by an act of God ;
very costly

to Him, which was all of grace. We have no claim upon God right
eously. Our only claim upon Him is that
of His heart, His love, and

His grace ;
and neither the heart, nor the love and grace of God can 

ever act at the expense of holiness. That is where the Cross came in. 

It was the means by which He made possible the forgiveness of God,

granted to both of them, the fifty and the five hundred sinner, what
ever the degree of guilt might have been.

Then we glance at the direct teaching. He teaches that moralcleansing is the inspiration of devotion, that love is not a mere passinghuman emotion. It is a great devotion, and it springs out of moralcleansing, No man knows what it is to love Jesus who is not conscious 
of His cleansing power from sin. It is interesting that allthrough this story the word for love is the highest, agapao,
love 
intelligent, informed, devoted. She loved much ;
and her love sprang

‘from the fact that her sins, which were many, had been forgiven. A 
cleansed heart becomes a loving heart. Moral cleansing sets free froma sense of bondage. It restores spiritual perception, and is of such anature that such a woman will violate her own inclination or prejudice. 
Nothing else would have persuaded her to go into that man’s 
house, but she went in. Luke is careful to tell us that when she knew 
He was in the house, that brought her in. She trampled on all her 

THE GOOD SAMARITAN 
prejudices when she went in, because she was spiritually cleansed, 
she was set free from the bondage of fear. What cared she for the 
opinion of Simon ? She knew the relationship between her Lord and 
herself. 

Then I look at her again, and learn from the whole story, in the 
light of the parable, that such devotion, resulting from moral cleansing, 
is the secret of restored beauty. That is what our Lord tried to show 
Simon, that the actions of the woman were characterized by beauty. 
Her tears, her kisses, her nard, were beautiful things ;
and they were 
brought by a woman whom Simon looked upon as sorled
and spoiled, 
smirched, and cast out and reprobate. So she was, until Jesus met her. 
But then at once all the graces of womanhood blossomed into beauty 
and into fine expression. That woman was nobly born, because she 
was born again ;
and the only men and women of noble birth are 
those born from above, morally cleansed, freed from all the bondage of 
tradition and fear, and blossoming with grace and beauty. All this 
was seen in a desire to serve her Lord, and the tears and kisses and 
nard were the sacramental symbols cf
the devotion of a woman whom 
Jesus had forgiven in the name of God, and delivered. His last word 
to her was this, “ 
Go in peace.” So we have rendered it, but it is 
really, “ 
Go into peace.” There was a future before her. Probably 
she never did get back into communion with Simon and his crowd. 
Very likely she would be looked down upon by some of the moralists 
who knew nothing of the grace of God. What did it matter ?
The 
Bible never names a woman of this kind. In great beauty, names are 
withheld ;
but the personality is seen. Two debtors, both forgiven, 
but the one who was conscious of the value of the gift manifested it 
in her devotion ;
and so went in peace. 

31. The Good Samaritan 
hk
X : 25-37
T
T
HIS is commonly known ‘as the parable of the good Samaritan. 
We cannot entirely ignore all that lies round about it ;
for our 
method of dealing with our subject has been that of, first, discovering 
the subject our Lord was intending to illustrate by the parable, or 
parabolic illustration He used ;
secondly, to examine the figure itself ;
and finally, to gather up the teaching resulting. 

We have called this a parable. I wonder if it was. Our Lord did 
not say so actually. He may have been quoting an incident ;
something 
that had actually happened. Unquestionably things like this 
did often happen on that road from Jericho to Jerusalem, for it was 
infested with robbers. To what then was Jesus referring when He 

156
PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

told that story, whether giving a piece of history, or using a parable?
He was showing two things ;
first, the relation of law to life ;
and 

secondly, the responsibility created by law.

The story is a beautiful one, merely as a story. Taken as the writer 

of a hymn took it, it is typical of the work of our blessed Lord, and

it is full of beauty. Exactly what happened, and why did Jesus tell

this story?
Jesus used the parable in answer to two questions asked by oneman. The first question was this, “
What shall I do to inherit eternal 
life ?
”
The Lord answered that with a statement. Then the lawyerasked the second question, “
Who is my neighbour ?
”
The story wastold to answer that question. The lawyer was one whose officialbusiness it was to interpret law. He was of the order of lawyers, orscribes. Those are synonymous terms. His whole business in lifewas that of showing the relation of law to life. In those times, if menhad a difficulty, they consulted a scribe, a lawyer, to know what thelaw said on this matter of behaviour in life. This was the man who 
came to Jesus. He said, Give me a law that will so condition life thatit will be full-orbed, eternal life. Eternal life does not mean long lifemerely ;
it is full life. Eternal life is high and deep, broad as well aslong ;
the life of the ages would be an accurate rendering of the greatphrase “
eternal life,” so often occurring. That was the phrase heused. He asked Jesus for a law, “
What shall I do ? ”
When we 
ask a man what we shall do, when we ask a teacher what we shall do,
we are asking him to state some law, to give us some commandment, 
to give us some instruction. That is the realm in which the 
story moves.

This was a request for a law conditioning life, in order to itsfulness. What this man wanted was life in its fulness. I think he 
was perfectly sincere. This is not the only time when Jesus wasasked that question. It is the great question that in some form oranother comes ever and anon from a human soul. Life, give me life.
Give me a law that shall condition my life so that it shall befull-
orbed and perfect. “
What shall I do that I may inherit eternal life ?”
Notice the method of the Master at that point. He looked at the 
man and said, “
What is written in the law, how readest thou?
”
That phrase was a technical term, constantly used by the scribes andteachers and lawyers. They would consult one another about somesubject or condition, and one would say to the other, “
How readest 
thou ?
”
Jesus said, You have asked Me for a law conditioning life.
What is written in the law ?
How do you read it. He flung the manback upon himself, and upon the things he already knew, and thethings with which he was familiar. He called him to a recognitionof those things he knew perfectly well, and he proved he knew them,
because he gave Jesus the right answer, the only answer, the complete 
answer. Jesus told him so. He said, “
Thou hast answered right. 

THE GOOD SAMARITAN 
This do, and thou shalt live.” That is the law that conditions life, 
said Jesus. 

Then we come to that which immediately introduces us to the 
story. It was a question concerning the responsibility created by law. 
The lawyer asked his second question, “
And who is my neighbour ?
”
It is most arresting that he fastened upon that part of his own answer. 
What had he said ?
“
Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy 
heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all 
thy mind, and thy neighbour as thyself.” Said Jesus, That is quite 
right ;
do it, and you shall live. The man replied, “
And who is my 
neighbour ? ”
He did not ask any question about the first commandment 
;
he only asked about the second, Again I see the manifestation 
of a remarkable intelligence in this lawyer. There was no question to 
him as to Who God was ;
but there was a chance of backing out of a 
difficulty by trying to find out who his neighbour was. Do not forget 
that this lawyer belonged to the rulers and teachers who said that 
no Gentile was a neighbour. There
is no need to make any long quotations, 
but in their writings they distinctly said no Gentile was to be 
treated as a neighbour. Neighbourliness belonged within the covenant 
people. That was the distinct teaching and these men knew it. Was 
there any lurking suspicion in his own soul that something was 
wrong ?
“
Who is my neighbour ? ”
Luke tells us very carefully he 
said this to justify himself. To justify himself with whom ?
With the 
crowd standing round ?
I do not believe it. With whom ? With his 
own conscience. He was dodging an issue. Then the Lord told this 

story, and that is the background which is all important. 

Look at the story itself. There are three things standing out, everyone of them demanding attention. As our Lord spoke, the picture 
grows before us. We see a road along which travellers journey, and 
certain events happening thereon. That is so simple, every child can 
understand it. If we have something a child can understand, we have 
something fit
for the philosophers !
Glance at the picture, and do not forget that our Lord was showing 
this man what the responsibility was, created by the law which 
conditions life, in order that life may be full. He was illustrating 
responsibility. Look at the road. Luke is careful as he says it was a 
road “ 
going down from Jerusalem to Jericho,” a geographical accuracy. 
The road did go down. The boundaries are there, Jerusalem and 
Jericho. Jerusalem, the city of history and religion, the great centre of 
privilege. Jericho, beautiful in situation, a city of palm trees, but a 
city that had been under a curse of God for centuries. The book of 
Joshua tells us this. Strangely enough by this time Jericho had becomea priestly city where priests dwelt when not fulfilling their courses inJerusalem. The road lying between these two cities was a rocky and 
dangerous gorge, a pathway haunted at the time by marauding Bedawin. 
It is so yet. It was on that very road in 1820 that an Englishman, 

158
PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

Sir Frederic Henniker, was stripped and slain by the descendants of 

these very men who robbed and wounded the man in this story. There 

was the road, and yet it was used by priests and Levites. I am inclined 

to think they had an immunity from attack of these brigands because 

of some superstition surrounding their calling. But they constantly 

travelled up and down that road. 

There we are face to face with the story. A road about fifteen to 

twenty miles long, connecting the city of privilege with the city of 

commerce as it was then, unsafe for travellers ;
and yet traversed by 

religious people. I present that to all social workers. The road had no 

business to be unsafe. What had they done ? They had done nothing. 

It may be they had attempted to exterminate these robbers, but 

had failed ;
had tried hard to drive them from their lurking places, and 

had failed. That is the road Jesus showed. It was quite familiar 

to them all, and perhaps with a great deal of trepidation, used by 

travellers,
except perhaps by priests and Levites, preserved by the 

superstition of their calling, by the brigands. 

Now see the travelIers.
First, here is an unknown man going down 
from Jerusalem to Jericho. We know no more about him. Whether 
he had been in Jerusalem for worship, I cannot tell. More likely he 
had been there for business. Most likely he was a man carrying certain 
forms of wealth about his person, of which the robbers knew. He 
travelled down that road. 

What else ?
Robbers, brigands, brutal men, selfish men, devoid 
of all pity as Iong as their own ends were served. They travelled along 
that road. 

Who is this other traveller we see going down ?
A priest. Thereis nothing to tell us which way he was travelling, whether coming 
from Jerusalem to Jericho ;
or going up to Jerusalem from Jericho. 
By chance, that is, by coincidence, he went by and passed that man 
lying there. A priest, either going home, having completed his ritual 
obligations in the temple of God, or else travelling up to Jerusalem, 
to fulfil
his ritualistic observances in the temple of God. 

But there is another man going along who is a Levite, shall we 
say, a secondary priest, one who served the temple, but had no direct 
function as the priest. He was in the same condition. He was on the 
way to complete, or had completed, his religious obligations. Two 
representatives of religion travelled along that road. 

Who is this other man ?
An unknown Samaritan, belonging to 
another nation. I wonder where he was going, and what he was doing 
upon that road ? I cannot tell. I am permitted to wonder many 
things I cannot answer. He was on the road. It is possible he was 
crossing it, to take another road that Ied
up to Mount Gerizim, for his 
worship. It is even possible he was coming back from Mount Gerizim 
after worship. He was an unknown man, a Samaritan. That robbed 
man was a Hebrew. That priest and J,evite
were Hebrews. The 

THE GOOD SAMARlTAN
I59
robbers we cannot tell what they were racially, probably Arabs. But 
this man had no dealings whatever with Jews. We are told Jews had 
no dealings with the Samaritans, and the other thing is equally true,
the Samaritans had no dealings with the Jews. This man, travellingalong, the robbers in hiding, a priest, a Levite, an unknown Samaritan,
all travelling that road.

With the happenings there is no need to tarry ;
the attack of the 
marauding robbers, the man overwhelmed, robbed, stripped ;
and in 
order that there should be no chance of his following, beaten until sofar as the robbers knew, there was no life left in him. The priestchanced to pass that way. There is no equivalent for “
chance ”
in 
the text, except that the word means a coincidence. He passed thatway, and he saw, but he did not stop, but at once passed on. The man 
was a Jew who was lying there bruised. That did not matter. Thepriest’s religious observances were too important, or else, having performed 
them, he might gather defilement ;
and he could not do anything, 
so he passed him.

The Levite, more callous than the priest, went and looked at him,
and examined him, and then he too passed on. The man was stillleft there, half-dead, bleeding, broken, bruised, robbed, helpless,

Then this travelling Samaritan came by, and immediately his heartwas touched. He was filled with compassion. But he was a Samaritan,
and this was a Jew. What did he care ?
The man was suffering. Hemight have said he did not have any dealings with Jews. But itdepended upon what condition they were in. This man was suffering.
He went to him, leaned over him, and poured into his wounds oil andwine, wonderful remedies of the time and pIace,
bound him up, pickedhim up, and put him on his beast. I do not know how far away theinn was, but he had to walk, while the man in his feebleness rode. He 
took him to the inn and gave the host
sufficient money to coverexpenses for several days at that time and that place ;
and moreover,
gave him an I.O.U. for anything over, “
Whatsoever thou spendestmore, I, when I come back again, will repay thee.” He passed on.

We never see him again, but Jesus said to this lawyer, You haveasked Me, Who is my neighbour ?
In effect you have asked whatresponsibility is created by those laws you have quoted, love to God 
and man. Tell me, which of these was neighbour to that poor fellow?
I do not want to be unfair to this lawyer, but it always seems to methere was a little superciliousness in his answer, but he gave Jesusthe right answer. He did not say, the Samaritan. He would not take 
that name on his lips. He gave the right answer; and quickly,
sharply, like the flaming of a lightning’s flash of God, Jesus replied,
“ 
Go thou and do likewise.” 

What a picture, what a parable. What does it teach ? First, that 
the purpose of law is always the conditioning of life. It is so with our 
human laws, faulty as they all are. It is pre-eminently so with the 

160 PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

Divine law. If God has given man a law, it is in order that man 

may know life, and eternal life in all its glory and fulness. The 

purpose of a law is healing and healthing, to use an old Anglo-Saxon 

word, There is an Old Testament name for Jehovah, Jehovah-
Ropheka. Expositors say that means the Lord Who heals. It really 

means the Lord that healths, and to health is not to make well, but it 

means to keep well, so that one is never sick. When we read in 

Revelation the leaves of the trees are for the healing of the nations, 

it is really the healthing of them, the keeping of them from being sick. 

That is the purpose of law. But supposing we become sick and are 

bruised and wounded and stricken, then the purpose of law is to heal 

to health. Those are the functions of law. 

What does this story reveal as to the breakers of law-first, the 

robbers who attack, but secondly and principally, the religionists who 

neglect ? Not those brigands, those bandits, those robbers, were more 

guilty ;
but that priest and Levite who left the man to bleed and 

sob his life out to death, without ministering to him. That is breaking 

law. It abides so to this time. All robbers who take, or by any means 

rob humanity of its riches, strip it, and leave it half dead, and broken, 

and bruised, are breakers of law. That is equally so if we pass by 

on the other side of that wounded man, that broken woman, that 

spoiled human nature. That is what our Lord was teaching. 

Finally He teaches us what the keeping of law means. Its inspiration 
is compassion. “ 
He was moved with compassion,” That is the 
first thing said about the Samaritan. What he did came out of his 
compassion. Take the New Testament and go through it, and look 
for that word “ 
compassion.” It is always used about Jesus, or by 
Jesus, and never about anyone eIse,
except as He used it in this case. 
Compassion is the inspiration of keeping law. 

What is the activity, if that is the inspiration ?
Personal service. 
The binding up of wounds, the pouring in of oil and wine, the lifting 
of the man to a beast that carries him, or makes provision for him. 
Those are the responsibilities which law creates. We can spell 
them in one little word of four letters LOVE. That does not 
make it easier !
3 2. Parabolic Illustrations 
Luke xi 

I
I
N this chapter there are three parabolic illustrations demanding 
attention. Whereas they are separate illustrations, they are concerned 
with the same subject. The first concerned the friend at midnight, 
the second concerned the father and his child; while the third, 
that of the strong man and the Stronger th,an
he, is in some senses 

PARABOLIC ILLUSTRATIONS 

separated from the first two. Studied carefully, however, it will be 
found there is a close connection between all three. 

The parable of the friend at midnight is peculiar to Luke. The 
illustration of the father and the child is also found in Matthew, but 
must be glanced at again, even though previously considered, because 
of its association with the parable of the friend at midnight. The 
illustration of the strong man and the Stronger is also to be found 
in Matthew, but we omitted it when surveying that book, because 
the account of Luke is more detailed. 

Take the first two together ;
that of the friend at midnight, and 
that of the father and his child. What was the subject our Lord was 
intending to illustrate ?
The answer can be given in a word-Prayer. 
This chapter in Luke opens, “
It came to pass, as He was praying in a 
certain place, that when He ceased, one of His disciples said unto 
Him, Lord, teach us to pray, even as John also taught his disciples.” 
It was out of that request that the Lord’s teaching came, and in that 
connection these two illustrations were used. 

Why did these men ask to be taught to pray ?
Notice they did not 
ask to be taught how to pray. That is rather arresting. It is often 
quoted as though they asked to be taught how to pray. That is not 
what this man asked. He said, “ 
Lord, teach us to pray.” He knew 
how to pray. The Lord had given special instructions concerning 
prayer in His Manifesto. This disciple had heard it unquestionably, 
and had received instructions how to pray. This man wanted to know, 
not the method, but to find the secret of praying ;
two very different 
things. There are many people who know how to pray, but they do 
not pray. I cannot say they listened to Him at prayer. We have no 
means of knowing whether He was praying aloud, or in silence. They 
were round about Him. They came to Him as He was praying in a 
certain place. Here in all probability He was praying alone. Alone 
does not necessarily mean they were not with Him, because they were 
with Him, and yet His prayer was alone. On an earlier occasion in 
Luke’s record it is said that when He was praying He was alone, and 
His disciples were with Him. We might change the word ”
alone ”
and say, apart, but His disciples were with Him. 

It has been affirmed, and I agree with the general statement, that 
Jesus never did pray with His disciples as though He were on a level 
with them. He always prayed alone. It is certainly well to remember 
that the word employed for His praying was never the word that 
indicated their prayer. It was a word that indicated fellowship and 
familiarity. He never came as an empty-handed pauper to pray. 
These disciples had watched Him praying, and when He had ceased, 
one of them, unquestionably affected by what he had seen, and perhaps 
heard, asked, “ 
Lord, teach us to pray.” Then there was a flashing 
side-light upon John, “ 
even as John also taught his disciples.” There 
is a suggested contrast. John had taught his disciples to pray. It is 

11 

162 PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

quite evident he had devoted himself to the prayer-life, and he had

taken time with those disciples of his early and mighty ministry to

teach them to pray. Yet these men saw in Jesus something different.

They were not content with what they knew as the result of John’s 

teaching. “ 
Lord, teach us to pray.”

Out of that request, that searching desire, Jesus answered, and 

in two ways. He first gave them a model of prayer with which we are

all familiar, an abbreviated model, but a full one in another way.

Then He turned to the illustrations of the friend at midnight, and

of the father and his child. 

First there came the model. He began by saying, “When ye pray,
say, Father.” Everything is there. We must keep that in mind whenwe come to the illustration of the father and the child. “
When yepray, say, Father.”

Having given this abbreviated model of prayer He then proceededto His illustrations. The first moved in the realm of human friendship.
Notice the recurrence of that word friend. It is an account of friendship. 
A request was preferred by a friend to a friend, on behalf of afriend. A man had come to call on him at midnight-a very awkward 
hour it may be admitted at once-and he had nothing to set beforehim. He had a friend in some dwelling nearby, and so he made hisway to the house of his friend, to ask him for help for this otherfriend. The awkwardness of the hour may be some excuse for theaction of the man in bed with his children. Notice what he objected 
to. He objected to being troubled. Keep the emphasis there.
Therefore on the basis of friendship he made a refusal. The house 
was locked up, he was in bed, and did not want to be troubled. That 
is the story.

But evidently this man who went for a loaf meant to get it. He 
kept on. Said Jesus, This man would not be troubled on the basis of 
friendship, but was disturbed, and so rose and acted because of theimportunity of the man who was asking. That is the word. That word 
importunity is very interesting. It is the only place in the Greek NewTestament where it occurs. Importunity means impudence. That isthe real meaning of the word. It comes from the Latin importunas,
which means troublesome. Because the man was importunate enough,
this man who would not be troubled on the basis of friendship, wastroubled in another way, by impudence. What for ? To make thetroubling cease. He only gave him the loaf to get rid of him, to savehimself further trouble. He who would not be troubled on the basis 
of friendship, got up and found the loaf and gave it to the man, sothat he went back home with something for his friend. That is our 
Lord’s illustration. 

Then He went on to the second illustration. ”
Of which of youthat is a father shall his son ask a loaf, and he give him a stone ?
or 
a fish, and he for a fish give him a serpent ? Or if he shall ask an egg, 

PARABOLIC ILLUSTRATIONS 

will he give him a scorpion ?
”
A father and child. Take the figure 

of speech first. A father never mocks a child’s request. Our Lord here 

very remarkably recognized that one element in human nature that 

abides, in spite of all human nature’s failure and breakdown. It is 

instinctive care of the father for the child. There may be some fathers 

who do not care. That I admit. But take the general outlook on life, 

and how marvellously
that is evidenced. Even though men themselves 

may be depraved, they have not lost the father heart in relation to the 

child. That is the picture. Jesus took it for granted, and He only 

asked a question. Can we imagine if a child asks for bread, the 

fat,her
gives a stone, or for a fish, a serpent, or for an egg, a scorpion ?
We need not change the figures to-day in this country. They 

were all familiar things then and there, bread, fish, and eggs, the 

very things children needed, and were likely to ask for. Our Lord 

took these familiar things, and the one thing He was impressing 

upon those who listened was that the father never mocks the child’s 

request. 

What had these illustrations to do with prayer ?
The first was 
an illustration in the realm of contrast. Often expositors and preachers 
have said this teaches importunity in the matter of prayer. It teaches 
nothing of the kind. It teaches that there is no need when we are 
dealing with God, to hammer and hammer at a door. God is not 
asleep, a sleepy man who does not want to be troubled, and therefore 
refuses ;
and is only persuaded to get up in order to escape trouble for 
Himself, by getting rid of the seeker. That is not the picture of God. 
It is intended to be a contrast. The record reads, “
Because of his 
importunity he will arise and give him as many as he needeth. And 
I say unto you, Ask, and it shall be given you ;
seek, and ye shall 
find ; 
knock, and it shall be opened unto you.” We do not have to 
keep on knocking. The door is open. “ 
Teach us to pray.” “
When 
ye pray, say, Father.” Understand that “
Father ”
implicates friendship, 
and understand that your Father is not as this man who on the 
human level was a friend of the man asking help. God is quite different 
from that. He does not need to be importuned. 

Again, “ 
Which of you that is a father.” You father, and “
thy 
Father.” The two illustrations merge, shining upon each other. God 
understands the need, and directly the soul applies to Him, the answer 
is given. There is no need for begging and praying and hammering at 
heaven’s gate, as that man did at midnight. I do not believe there is 
any necessity to persuade God to do something for us, or to keep 
on asking. We may say, We have asked Him, and He did not give us 
anything. We should rather say, We wanted something we did not 
need, and our Father did not give it to us. With all reverence take 
those words of Jesus surrounding them. Supposing a son does not ask 
for bread, but asks for a stone, would the father give it to him ?
A 
fine old English phrase comes to me-1 trow not !
Supposing he asks 

164
PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

a serpent, will a father give it to him ? I think not. Supposing he

does not ask for an egg, but for a scorpion. The father will say, No,

certainIy
not. We need not keep on hammering. God knows, and

His gift is always based upon His Fatherhood, and upon His love.

There is no need for being importunate as the word suggests. This 

is the only case in the New Testament in which that word is found, 

and it is rightly rendered. There is no need for importunity with

God. 

Then comes the story of the father and the child to illustrate

what God is. We may rest assured if we ask, it is given. Mark the 

contrast. In the first illustration the man would not give. He did 

not want to be
but at last did give to save himself further

trouble. You are different, said Jesus. When you ask, having said,

“ 
Father,” it is given ;
seeking, you find ;
knocking, there is no need for

hammering, for the door is open. It was a great old Hebrew who said

of God in one application, “ 
He is ready to pardon,” and He is always 

ready and waiting. Do not forget what I illustrated, by turning those

illustrations round. When I go to Him, and ask for a stone instead of

bread, or a serpent instead of a fish, or a scorpion instead of an

egg, or we have asked Him for something; because He knew

we did not need that, later on we find when we asked a stone, 

He gave us bread ;
and for a serpent, fish ;
and for the scorpion, 

an egg.

Luke here records something that had happened previously, butunquestionably he has recorded it here because of its application to theteaching Jesus was giving on the subject of the relation of the HolySpirit. He will give the highest gifts. Matthew records Him as saying“ 
good things.” Luke records Him as saying “ 
the Holy Spirit,” the 

highest, the best, the one great gift humanity needs for its regeneration, 
and for all its life. 

Then Luke went back, to tell how on one day they charged Jesuswith complicity with Beelzebub, the devil. They acknowledged Hiswas supernatural power, but that it was of the devil. It was then that 
Jesus spoke to them very severely, sternly, solemnly ;
but He rebutted 
that argument. He claimed that what He did, was done with the fingerof God. There is no contradiction in the two things. The terms are 
synonymous. Jesus said what He was doing was not done under thepower of the underworld of evil, but in the power of the Holy Spirit.
In saying that, He used this wonderful illustration. A strong manfully armed guardeth his own court, and his goods are in peace.
That is Satan. Satan fully armed, guards his realm, and we cannotinterfere with his goods. But when the Stronger than he shall come,
that is, the Son of God, the Lord Himself ;
He shall overcome him, and 
take from him his whole armour,
and divide his spoils. That was His 
illustration. 

Then to those who were diabolically criticizing Him He said, “
He 

THE RICH FOOL 

that is not with Me is against Me, and he that gathereth not with Me 
scattereth.” In other words, our Lord there claimed to be the Stronger 
than the strong man armed, and that He was Master over the 
strong man. As our beloved friends of the Salvation Army sing 
oftentimes, 

“
Jesus is stronger than Satan and sin,
Satan to Jesus must bow. 
Therefore I triumph without and within,
For Jesus is saving me now.” 

That is the whole fact, and that is what He was claiming, that He was 

mightier than all the forces of evil. It was a remarkable phrase our 

Lord used there. He takes from him his whole panoply, his whole 

armour.
That Greek word only occurs in one other place in the New 

Testament, where Paul was writing to the Ephesians, “
Take the whole 

panoply of God.” We take that text and preach sermons, and rightly 

so, to show how we are armed. We are to wear the same panoply, but 

do not forget it is God’s armour.
It is the armour
that has made Him, 

is making Him, and will make Him invincible against all attacks. The 

Stronger than the strong came against the strong man, and took from 

him his panoply, because His own panoply was stronger. He was claim
ing authority over all evil forces, and to be stronger than all of them. 

That Ephesian passage (vv. 6-11)
is worth careful study ;
the armour
which God wears is invincible over all the forces of evil. 

So in this realm of teaching, in which the thought of the Spirit 
is found throughout, He was showing that by the Spirit He overcame, 
and He had just told His disciples that His Father would give theSpirit to those who asked Him, so that we may be more than conquerors, 
the highest answer to which is not in the initial, but the 
continuous filling of the Spirit of power. 

33. The Rich Fool
Luke xii :
13-21
T
T
HIS parable also is peculiar to Luke, and in common with others 
peculiar to his record, this familiar story has made a profound 
impression. It is almost startling in its clarity, and supreme in the 
light
it throws upon life. Those two men seen in the background of the 
story must be considered, for they were both involved when our Lord 
spoke the parable. We must also remember its supreme note, that it 
has to do with life. 

Immediately preceding the parable itself, our Lord was speaking to 
a man, and said, “
Who made Me a Judge or a Divider over you ? ”
166 PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

Then Luke says, “ 
And He said unto them,” not to the man who had 
spoken to Him, but “ 
unto them.” What does that mean ? To whom ?
It may be said, to the disciples, and we should not be wrong, for undoubtedly 
they heard what He said. Or it may be He was addressingHimself to the large crowds surrounding Him at the moment, for there

(were such. The commencement of the chapter reads, “
In the meantime, 
when the many thousands of the multitude were gatheredtogether insomuch that they trode one upon another, He began to sayunto His disciples first of all, Beware ye of the leaven of the Pharisees.”
So He was surrounded by multitudes, and His disciples were there;
and He was in the midst of giving them definite and specific instructionin view of the hostility which was growingly manifest against Him, andHe knew would be manifest against them as His representatives andfollowers in the days to come. He was charging His disciples not tobe afraid of hostility, of them that kill the body, and after that hadno more that they could do. Taking the whole of His teaching, wefind He spoke of God’s care of sparrows, and arguing from that Hiscare of them. 

In the midst of this teaching a man interrupted Him. To thatinterruption He replied, and then “ 
He said unto them.” The disciplescertainly heard, and unquestionably the greater crowd heard what Hesaid, but I believe “
them ”
referred specially to the man who hadspoken to Him, and the brother about whom he spoke. “
Take heed, 
and keep yourselves from all covetousness ; 
for a man’s life consisteth 
not in the abundance of the things which he possesseth.” That is the 
theme, life. It was to illustrate life, and its application to the casebefore Him, and to His disciples, and to the multitudes listening thatHe uttered this parable.

This man asked Him to intervene between himself and his brother 
in the matter of the division of an inheritance, We do not know all 
lying behind that request according to the law and custom of the time;
but it was certainly possible that a man would wrong another, and.in
all probability that was the case here. We are not to suppose theman was wholly in the wrong, so far as the division of an inheritancewas concerned. While Jesus was talking to His disciples, He hadtalked about God’s wonderful care of sparrows and His children, thisman suddenly broke in. It was quite evidently an interruption, almosta rude one. The man was evidently not thinking about what Jesuswas saying. There was no relation between his request and the teaching 
of Jesus at this point ;
indeed the request was quite alien from it.
If this man had been listening to His teaching, and had accepted itin any sense, he would not have spoken. There was a fretting andfuming against the wrong as he spoke, and perhaps on the human levelit was a wrong. At any rate he appealed to Jesus to bid his brotherto divide the inheritance with him. 

Our Lord’s refusal was a sharp one, and was in the form of a 

THE RICH FOOL 
question, in which He revealed the fact that He was not in the world

on the business of judging and dividing inheritances, which were

wholly of the earth, and human, on the material level. Then to the 

listening multitudes He made that tremendous declaration, ” 
A man’s 

life consisteth not in the abundance of the things which he possesseth,”

and then He spoke the parable. He was illustrating the meaning of life,

what it really is, to people who were largely thinking of life in the

terms of the material, and the earthly, as evidenced by that interjec
tion. They were thinking in the terms of things. Keep His word in

mind, “ 
Things.” How largely our life is conditioned by things. What 

things ? Just things, that is all. Half the trouble in life is that we think 

there are things we do not possess which we would like to possess. No,

said Jesus, that is not life. A man’s life consisteth not, is not held

together, is not made entire and complete by things, even though

there is an abundance of them. 

So we reach the parable itself. It is very simple. Look at the figureJesus employed. “ 
A certain man.” The first thing that impresses usis that he was, on the material level, a fortunate man. He was rich,
and he was successful through diligence. There is no hint here offraud. There is no suggestion this man added wealth to wealth byfraudulent procedure. One can always expect wealth to bring more.
Moreover, he was a thoughtful man. He was sagacious. Jesus portrayshim, “ 
He reasoned within himself.” In the presence of his multipliedprosperity, when his land was bringing forth more and more, and wealthwas piling up, he took time to sit down and think. A sagacious manwithal. What is this I hear him saying ?
“
My fruit, my barns, mycorn, my goods, my soul.” He has listed them, and he has prefacedevery reference to that possessive pronoun “ 
my.” “ 
A man’s life consisteth 
not in the abundance of the things which he possesseth.” “
Myfruits .. .
my barns .
.. my corn .
.. my goods,” and of course 
the appalling and arresting thing is “ 
my soul.” 

Look at him again. There is nothing vulgar about this man according 
to our common standards of vulgarity. What is he thinking about ?
What is his goal, his aim ? “ 
My soul, Soul, thou hast much goods,” 
material possessions. What will be the outcome of having goods ?
Oh,
the tragedy of it, “
Eat, drink, and be merry.” That is the most vulgarthing that can be said about life ;
goods the possession of the soul,
in order that the personality may eat and drink and be merry. One 
cannot read this story without feeling how appallingly revealing it isof life as it is being lived to-day in multitudes of cases. Here is the 
picture of an entirely sensual man who imagines his soul can be fed withgoods, and that the one object of everything else is to eat and drinkand be merry.

Yet look at him again. He is restless, and his satisfactions whichare anticipated, are Postponed until to-morrow. To-morrow he is goingto say to his soul, Eat, drink, and be merry. What is wrong with this 

168 PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

man ?
So far there is not a word about God. “ 
My fruits.” Where 
did they come from ?
“ 
My barns.” Where did he get them ? “
My 
corn.” Whence came it ?
“ 
My goods,” yes, all my possessions, and 
” 
my soul.” Back of the fruits, the corn, the goods, and back of the 
soul is God. That is what is the matter with him. He is not recognizingGod ;
he does not know Him. 

Then comes the dramatic part of the story that breaks in like a 
clap of thunder. “ 
But God said unto him.” The Revision has softened 
it in translation, I like the Old Version because it is exactly what it 
means, “ 
Thou fool,” in spite of your wealth, and your diligence and 
success and sagacity ;
because you think you can be satisfied with 
goods !
“ 
this night shall thy soul be required of thee.” But it is “
my 
soul.” No, it is not ;
and therefore neither fruit nor barns nor corn 
nor goods belong to you. If you do not possess your own soul, you 
possess none of these things to which you are looking to satisfy your 
soul. You do not possess your soul. God shall this night require it of 
thee “
and the things which thou hast prepared, whose shall they be?
”
We can see this man that night going out. His hands cannot handle 
shekels any more. He cannot go and see to the gathering of the fruits 
into barns any more. He has passed over, and all these things are still 
there, and the satire of eternity for the folly of time, “
Whose shall 
they be ?
”
Why are you pihng
up things for men and women to 
wrangle over when you are dead ?
They are still doing it !
What a 
wonderful story this is. 

We need not say much about it. Here our Lord was dealing with 
life. A man’s life consisteth not in fruits and barns and corn and 
goods. He may have them in abundance, but they do not hold life;
they do not make it consistent. A man’s life does not consist in those 
things. He can have them and multiply them and store them ;
but 
that is not life. Our Lord used a word here for life. The man talked 
about his soul. They are two different words here. The man’s word 
referred to his personality, and he used the word psgcke,
soul. That is 
only mental. Paul writing of personality, gave that full and final 
analysis of it, “
Your whole spirit (pneuma), soul (psyche), and body 
(soma).
There is the tripartite mystery of human personality. This 
man did not talk about his spirit, but his soul, the mental side of him. 
It is a wonderful side through which we have appreciation of all things 
of mental activity. “ 
My soul,” my mind ;
and he thought that was 
his essential life. It is not. The psychic is always the mental consciousness. 
PauI
wrote in one of his letters about the I 
natural man.” We 
should be perfectly correct if we translated that “
the psychic man ”
;
that is his word, the man who lives in the mental only. Thepsychic man can be mastered by the flesh from beneath, and become 
fleshly ;
or he can become mastered by the spirit, and become 
spiritual. 

When our Lord spoke of a man’s life He did not use either of the 

THE RICH FOOL 
man’s words. He used the old and familiar word, zoe ;
that is, thesimple word for life, any life, the life of the butterfly, or of the beast,
the angels, the archangels, or the life of man, and the life of God.
In Greek literature they had another word for life, bias,
and they spokeof bios as of higher development ;
and zoe as the animal and lower side 
of it. We are still doing this. We talk of biology, and mean the higherform ;
and zoology, and go to the Zoological Gardens to study it.
Yet mark this well. The word Christ used was the word that refers to 
life, essential life, not spirit only, not mind alone, and body ;
but all,
that principle that creates the difference between death and life. Whenever 
we read the phrase “
eternal life ”
in the New Testament, this isthe word used. It is very wonderful how Christianity took a word inGreek literature which had been degraded to something lower, andmade it the supreme thing ;
life that is supreme. That is what our 
Lord said, “ 
A man’s life.” This man was talking about his psychicnature, the mental apprehension. Life is more than that. That 
essential thing cannot be fed with goods. “ 
A man’s life consisteth not 
in the abundance of the things which he possesseth.” Zoe is far more 
than $suche.
That is only the mental and psychic side, and any manwho is living there, however highly he trains it, however erudite hismentality may be, so that he may have the right to be known as aneminent scholar in the realm of the mental, if he has shut out God, andhas no contact with Him in fruits and barns and corns and everything,
then he is living on a low level, and is not living at all in the true sense 
of the word ;
for “ 
a man’s life consisteth not in the abundance of the 
things which he possesseth.”

Then what about life ?
Life is under the control of God, and itsearthly period is marked by God. God will break through somewhere.
”
But God !
”
Whether it is to enter upon the fulness of life, or whetherit is to pass out into the darkling void, God is always there. He maybe unknown, and it is an awful tragedy when He breaks in as Hebroke in upon the life of this man. Remember possession is nevercomplete. Everything we hold is leasehold, rather than freehold. Thelease runs on until God says, “
Thy soul is required of thee.” The one 
supreme fact in life is God, and it is a tragedy of all tragedies whenHe breaks in upon the soul unmindful of Him, with a “
but,” anddeclares “
Thy soul is required of thee.”

The parable applied to both those brothers. They were bothcharacterized by selfishness, the one who gripped and held, and theother who coveted and wanted to grip and hold. So our Lord warned 
them against the sin of covetousness, and after the parable He said,
“
So,” like that man, “
is he that layeth up treasure for himself, and isnot rich toward God.” 

170
PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

34.
The Watchful Servants 
Luke xii :
41-48
HERE are senses in which this paragraph is not an easy one withTwhich to deal. While not exactly obscure, we need to give carefulattention to certain details, in order not to miss its chief value. 

The parable in its fulness is peculiar to Luke. Other parables havemoved in the same realm. In the twenth-fourth and twenty-fifthchapters of Matthew we considered three, one communal, having to dowith inter-relationships within His Kingdom ;
one personal, dealingwith the supply of oil for lamps ;
and one imperial, concerning thetalents entrusted to His own. When considering the first of these inMatthew, we postponed a full consideration, because the teachinghere in Luke is fuller than that given in Matthew. Matthew recorded 
briefly this parable as our Lord uttered it in the Olivet prophecy.
Luke gives it as our Lord had uttered it in an earlier part of Hisministry.

This parable has a value a11
its own. What was our Lord intendingto illustrate ?
Notice how the record begins. “
And Peter said, Lord,
speakest Thou th&
parable unto us, or even unto all ?
”
What parable?
Certainly not the one we are now considering, because He had notthen uttered it. Immediately preceding that question is a parableJesus had been uttering, and the question of Peter concerned theapplication of that previous parable, which dealt with the subject offidelity to an absent Lord. Matthew Henry once said, “
Thank God 
for Peter. He was always asking questions.” His questions alwaysbrought forth wonderful answers. This was a perfectly fair question,
“
Speakest Thou this parable unto us, or even unto all ?
”
It is one 
that faces US as we consider the parable. This present study is theanswer to the question about fidelity to an absent Lord. The “
us ”
referred to the twelve chosen apostles, representatives of those whoshould be the successors in the long history. Is the teaching of thatparable restricted to such, or does it apply to all ?
Whether the “
all ”
means all men, or all disciples, we cannot say. Peter was definitelyseeking to know if our Lord’s teaching was intended to lay responsibility 
on the apostles, and those who should be called after them tocertain definite spiritual authority within the Church of God, orwhether it applied to all the Church. That is the background of theparable.

Notice how our Lord answered it. He did so by asking a questionwhich, in a sense, He did not answer at all. Peter said, Who is thatteaching for ?
Is it for us, or all
? Jesus said, “
Who then is the 
faithful and wise steward, whom his lord shall set over his household ?
”
The question is open. Does what He is now going to say apply to a 

THE WATCHFUL SERVANTS 

special company, called to specific service, or does it apply to all?
Our Lord left it quite open. In effect He said, What I have said

applies to every steward in the household who is faithful and true,

whether in a special sense called to ministry, or not. I think in the 

last analysis the supreme value of the parable is for such, but it

applies to others as well.

The picture our Lord here drew was of a household, which we 
must interpret by the East. There the household is a very differentthing to what it is here. The household was composed of a lord, amaster, the supreme one over all those who constituted the household, 
a despot not in any bad sense, but in a good sense, signifyingcomplete and unquestioned and unqualified authority. Then in thehousehold there was the office of stewardship, those under the lordwho were the representatives of the lord. They were stewards of theproperty of their lord. A steward not only had charge of these things,
he was responsible for their administration in the household. In the 
Eastern countries, too, the position of steward was often held by slaves,
bond-servants. In this story the word used for servant isdozclos,
bond-
slave. Those who were representatives of the ruler, the lord, were incomplete surrender and subservience. That was the household.

Now in that household the responsibility that rested upon those 
who were stewards, being bond-servants, was that of watching overthe life of all
in the household, and of feeding all in that household.
In the teaching of Jesus, taking the figure, we see that it was applicableto all in a household. Every bond-slave was in some measure thesteward of the property of his lord, and every bond-slave was responsible 
to the rest in the household for the administration of the will of 
his lord, and the feeding of each other. Yet there were those in such 
households who were in special positions of government and authorityover the affairs. That is the picture.

What were the possibilities lying within that fact of stewardship inthe household ?
Simply, fidelity on the one hand and failure on theother ;
those faithful and those unfaithful. Reasons for infidelity onthe part of stewards within the household are suggested. The lord is 
absent, he is not there. There may be those who postpone his return,
or declare, “
He delayeth his coming ”
;
and are therefore careless 
in their watching for him ;
the result being that they do wrong to eachother. They “ 
begin to beat the men-servants and the maid-servants,”
ill-treat them, and give themselves to carousing. That is infidelity.
The Lord’s teaching is that presently when the lord comes himself,
he will deal with these stewards. He will deal with those who have 
been faithful, and set them in authority over all other things ;
associating 
himself completely with them in dominion. With those unfaithful,
they will receive condemnation. He “ 
shall cut him asunder.” The 
Old Version had it, “ 
cut him in sunder.” The Revised Version has 
changed it. The judgment will be discriminative. Those who knew 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

and wilfully 
disobeyed their lord’s will will be beaten with many 

stripes ;
and those who disobeyed, and yet did not know the lord’s 

will, yet were guilty, and did things worthy of punishment, will be 

beaten with few stripes. 

If the story is taken in all its simplicity, we see what this teaching 

really is. There is a sense in which this parable is applicable to all 

in the household. That is a great phrase, ” 
the household of God,” 

which is the living Church. Every member of the Church is responsible 

for the other. The one sentiment which is for evermore denied at the 

door of the Church is the sentiment that is never recommended by the 

lips that first used it, “ 
Am I my brother’s keeper ?
”
We should 

remember that. Yet there is the attitude, the peril, the possibility of 

au attitude in those words, “ 
Am I my brother’s keeper ? ”
That is not 

true in the Christian Church. If it is true, then there are stewards 

who are failing. We are all responsible for each other in the great 

household of God. 

Yet it is true according to New Testament teaching, that God has 
called by the Holy Spirit, and set apart certain within the Church who 
are in specific sense in oversight. That is the meaning of the word 
bisho$.
Bishop and presbyter are synonymous terms in the New Testament. 
They meant those who have oversight. That is what the writer 
of the epistle said, “ 
Remember them that had the rule over you.” 
Who were they ?
Those “ 
which spake unto you the word of God.” 
These orders of Christian ministry emerge clearly in the New Testament. 
We have mixed them terribly, and yet their essential values 
remain, those who are called upon ”
to watch in behalf of the souls ”
of 
“ 
the household of God.” Whereas the application of this parable ofJesus is unquestionably to all, I cannot study it without being convinced 
that its special application is to those whom we to-day call 
ministers. We are mistaken if we think ministers are servants of men. 
We are servants of the Lord, and
“ 
your servants for His sake,” in His 
interests. There are great words in the New Testament-bishop, 
teacher, pastor ;
and they all mark the fact of a position of responsibility 
in the Church of God concerning that Church.

The great underlying thought here is that of a revelation of an 
atmosphere in all this teaching of Jesus, that of fellowship in the 
household in the absence of our Lord, the fellowship of the Christian 
Church. The Lord used that distributive method in order to show that 
it applied to all those who take the position of bond-service, or 
stewardship ;
whether specially or generally, but specially to those 
who are called. In the book of the Acts we have that wonderful story 
in the twentieth chapter of Paul calling together the elders of the 
Church at Ephesus, and talking to them. Take a few sentences that 
fell from his lips. “
Take heed unto yourselves, and to all the flock, 
in the which the Holy Ghost hath made you bishops,” that is, overseers, 
“
to feed the Church of God, which He purchased with His owu
THE WATCHFUL SERVANTS 

I73
blood.” So Paul said to the elders at Ephesus, and it reveals the very 

thought of responsibility. 

In Peter’s letter we find the same great truth (I Peter v. I), “
The 

elders among you ”
-presbyters-“ I exhort, who am a fellow-elder, 

and a witness of the sufferings of Christ, who am also a partaker of the 

glory that shall be revealed.” How did he charge them ? “
Tend the 

flock of God which is among you, exercising the oversight, not of con
straint, but willingly, according unto God ;
nor yet for filthy lucre, 

but of a ready mind.” Mark this, “
Neither lording it over the charge 

allotted to you.” It is interesting to note that the word “
Charge ”
is 

the word cleros,
from which we derive our word clergy. This is the 

only occurrence of the word in the New Testament. The clergy, there
fore, according to the New Testament, are not the special ministers 

of the Church, but the rank and file of the members. The Church 

members here are in the clergy, and the minister is not !
The clergy 

means the laity. It has to do with the inheritance, and the elders are 

not to lord it over the clergy, but to make themselves “
ensamples to 

the flock.” “
And when the chief Shepherd shall be manifested, ye 

shall receive the crown of glory that fadeth not away.” 

Those two references show how the teaching of Jesus has special 
and first-hand application. To every brother in the ministry, and 
Sunday School teacher, and those preparing for this sacred work, it is 
borne in upon us as we study these words of Jesus, that we feed the 
flock of God. 

It may be said, Surely the picture cannot be a true one, that 
within the household were those beating their men-servants and maidservants, 
and eating and drinking, and becoming drunken. It is rather 
startling. But consider the history of the Christian Church. Again and 
again within the Church, on the part of those supposed to be stewards 
and fellow-watchers, this very thing has literally taken place ;
the beating, 
and beating to death, in the supposed interest of Christ Himself. 
One of the things that gives me cause for hope and rejoicing to-day 
is that there is far less of it than there was when I was young. I 
can remember the extreme bitterness manifested to those who were 
of the household of God by others, and how men mauled each other. 
They are still doing it. ,There
is an awful possibility of being in thisfellowship, and so failing that our treatment of our fellow-men is 
utterly antagonistic to the spirit and genius of Christianity. Study the 
history of the Church to see to what I am referring. 

What then are our duties ? Paul said, Watch, and also, Feed the 
flock of God. Peter emphasized it. There is to be mutual ministry 
within the Christian Church, that of helpfulness, a mutual ministry on 
behalf of the other douloi.
In the Church it is specially true. It is 
philosophically true of the whole race, but in the Church it is specially 
true, ” 
No man liveth unto himself.” It is also written, every man 
lives for his Lord, but this applies to his fellow-member too. When 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

I74
the function is fulfilled, then we find the blessedness ;
and when it 

fails, there must be discipline and punishment. 

“
Lord, to whom sayest Thou this ? Unto us or to all ?
”
To both, 

to all, to any who become members of the household, bond-slaves of 

the Lord, and stewards, serving each other in the things of the King
dom of God. 

35. The Barren Fig-tree 
Luke xiii :
6-g
H E PARABLE of the barren fig-tree is again peculiar to the Gospel

Taccording to Luke, and is one that has become familiar. Again 

care is needed to discover the subject which our Lord intended to 

illustrate. The figures of the fig-tree and the vineyard were prominent 

nationally at that time. One might be familiar with the song of the 

vineyard in the fifth chapter of the prophecy of Isaiah, without 

realizing that this parable as to method is closely connected with it. 

There is no doubt that in the mind of our Lord thoughts of Isaiah’s 

song are to be found, and that His parable in certain ways was an 

adaptation of that song of Isaiah. 

This parable might be applied to the nation of Israel, and to 
God’s dealing with that people. While not denying that there may be 
such an application, unquestionably there is that implication; if that 
be all, we do not really understand at what our Lord was aiming. So 
we must give attention to the context of His parable.

In doing so we see at once the apphcation
was individual rather 
than national. The larger application is of course involved, but the 
national entity has to be measured by individuals, and its strength 
measured by the individual unit. As it is true that every chain is as 
strong as its weakest link, and no stronger ;
and every fortress is as 
strong as its least guarded gate, and no stronger ;
so
the nation is 
as strong as the individual. If it is weak individually, the weakness 
of the national life is created. So there is the closest relationship 
between the national and individual application. 

However, we are concerned to know why our Lord, at this point, 
used this parable ;
and also to mark the relationship of all that lies 
round about it. To find the answer we go back to the previous twelfth 
chapter. It is one continuous narrative, the two chapters being linked. 
Luke is careful to show, at the beginning of chapter thirteen, that what 
Jesus was about to say happened at the same time. In verse fifty-
four, in chapter twelve, we find Jesus speaking to the multitudes. To 
summarize there, He was rebuking the people because they were unable 
to discern the times in which they lived. He recognized their mental 
ability. He said they were weather-wise, but were entirely ignorant 

THE BARREN FIG-TREE 

as to spiritual things. “
Ye hypocrites, ye know how to interpret theface of the earth and the heaven ;
but how is it that ye know nothow to interpret this time ?
”
He was charging them with spiritualincapacity and misunderstanding of life.

Then “
at that very season,” so begins chapter thirteen, therewere people who came to tell Him something that Pilate had done. He 
had mingled the blood of some Galileans with the sacrifices they hadoffered. The Galileans were a hot-headed crowd, and were often insome political difficulty, and it is quite evident there had been sometrouble. At the time perhaps some religious festival was going forward. 
They were offering sacrifices, and Pilate had sent down apunitive expedition, and had slain them, mingling their blood withtheir sacrifices. They came and told Jesus the news. When ?
Immediately 
“ 
at that very season,” when He had rebuked them for 
ignorance and inability to discern the times.

Why did they tell Him that at that time ?
Note His reply. He said, 
“
Think ye that these Galileans were sinners above all the Galileansbecause they have suffered these things ?
”
Was that what they werethinking ? Was that how they were looking upon life ?
Was that 
their interpretation of things ?
Were they thinking that thoseGalileans 
were sinners above all because they suffered these things ?
Were 
they imagining that a swift judgment was evidence of profound sin?
“ 
I tell you, Nay.” They were wrong. They misunderstood life;
“ 
but, except ye repent, ye shall all in like manner perish.” Did that 
mean that Pilate would slay them too ?
They were looking upon theslaying of those people as though they perished. That is not thedeepest meaning of perishing. They were slain by Pilate, but theycould perish without being slain by Pilate, and they would, unlessthey repented of their sins.

Then transferring His thought from Galilee to Judas,
He continued, 
“
Or those eighteen, upon whom the tower of Siloam
fell, andkilled them, think ye that they were offenders above all the menthat dwell in Jerusalem ?
I tell you, Nay ;
but, except ye repent, yeshall all likewise perish.” That is the context of the parable.

He had rebuked the multitudes for their spiritual insensibilityto the time in which they were living ;
and they, desiring to showHim that they were not such fools as He imagined, said, We do understand 
things. We know that because Pilate killed these Galileansthis catastrophic judgment falling upon men proved that they weresinners above all. Our Lord gave them a parable to correct theirfalse thinking about life ;
and revealed once and for all, the truthabout human life, whether individually or nationally. Keeping hereto the individual application, He gave parabolic illustration of the truthconcerning human life, as against the foolish superstition in their 
minds of which they had given evidence, as they reported this story

about Pilate and the Galileans. 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

Even to-day there is a tendency to say some catastrophe is the 

judgment of God upon people, because of their extreme wickedness. 

We have no right to say such a thing. People said that the earthquake 

in San Francisco, and the fire that followed, was the judgment of God 

on that city. Nothing of the kind. God does not deal with men like 

that now. That is not His method. Here in this parable we see the 

truth concerning all life, and though we may never be slain by Pilate’s 

soldiers, or be crushed by the falling of houses in an earthquake, we 

may perish unless we repent.

Look at the parable. What a marvellously
clear and succinct 
revelation it is. It is a simple and human story. What is the picture 
presented ?
First we see a proprietor, and his rights are revealed. 
“ 
A certain man had a fig-tree.” It was his, planted in his vineyard. 
It derived all its resources from his soil, his property. There are three 
rights of the proprietor, taking the picture simply. 

There is first the absolute right of the proprietor to his own property. 
It was his soil. It was his vineyard. It was his fig-tree. It belonged 
to him. 

Secondly we see, growing out of the absolute right, the moral right 
of expectation. Why did he give that fig-tree room in his vineyard ?
Because he expected figs, fruit. If a man plants a fig-tree in his garden, 
he expects figs. We can change the figure. If a man plants an apple-
tree in his garden, what does he do it for ?
Apples. The moral expectation 
is perfectly justifiable. 

But in this parable there is another right, a punitive right of the 
proprietor to destroy that which fails. That is what the proprietor 
said to the vinedresser, the one in charge of his vineyard. For three 
years I have sought fruit on this fig-tree, and found none. My right 
of expectation has been trifled with, and thwarted, in spite of my 
patience for three years. Cut it down. Who will gainsay his right 
to do it ?
His right was created not merely because it brought forth 
no fruit, but because it cumbered
the ground. That means two things. 
Another tree, occupying that same space and soil, will bear fruit,
and because it is robbing the soil of its riches, and bringing forth no 
fruit, it is ruining the soil. Those are the proprietor’s rights as we 
look at the picture. There is no need to make any application. 

Now in the parable there is interference, gracious, beneficent, but 
just, made by an intercessor. What does he ask ? An opportunity 
to provoke that failing tree to such action as shall produce the fruit. 
“ 
Let it alone this year also till I shall dig about it,” disturb it ;
‘
and 
dung it,” fertilize it. That is the plea of the intercessor. Is that all ?
No, “ 
If it bear fruit thenceforth, well.” That is what thou hast been 
expecting. If I can make it produce fruit, that is everything ;
and 
if not, then there is no quarrel between the vinedresser and the proprietor. 
“ 
If not, thou shalt cut it down.” 

As we look at the fig-tree, what is the revelation ?
Everything 

THE BARREN FIG-TREE I77
depends upon the fulfilment of the proprietor’s moral right to fruit. 
If a tree bears fruit, it will still keep its place ;
and functioning according 
to the intention of the proprietor, he will be satisfied. If it fails, 
in spite of the intercessor’s plea, and his ministry, there is only one 
thing to do. A fruitless tree must not be allowed to cumber
the 
ground. 

Here the truth concerning Iife is revealed, whether it be individual 
or national matters nothing. The first fact is, the rights of God. 
Are people tired of hearing that ?
I thank God that it is being said 
with new emphasis again to-day. A man has no rights apart from 
the rights of God. The only right man has is to be damned !
That is 
not the only thing. We have no right to expect anything, except 
for the mercy and grace of God. God’s rights are the absolute rights 
of proprietorship. We are His by creation. We have no power of 
personality that is not created by God. Any essential power of personality 
is the result of Divine creation, and we are in His vineyard. 
This world is His. We have lived in it so many years. We have 
breathed His air. We have known His sunlight, We have benefited 
by His laws. Here we are, living in His world, His creation, His 
property, and deriving all the resources of personality from that whichis His. 

Has He any moral right of expectation ?
What does He expect ?
When looking at the fig-tree I used the word of the parable and said 
we could change it to suit this Western clime in which we live. What 
did that man want from that tree ?
Figs. What is God looking for 
in man ? What is He looking for in me ? A man. What is He looking 
for in you ? A man, a woman, a youth, a child. When He said, “
Let 
Us make man,” He is looking for the realizing of the meaning of our 
own life, according to His own creation. Suffer me an illustration, 
often used. When a boy in Sunday School, we used to sing, 

“
I want to be an angel,
And with the angels stand.
A crown upon my forehead,
And a harp within my hand.” 

Surely there was never anything more stupid taught to children than 
that !
I am not an angel, thank God. God never intended us to be 
angels, and He never intends us to be. He does not want angels when 
He makes men. He wants men. Someone may say I am lowering the 
standard. No, I am not. What is a man ?
We have only one answer. 
Jesus is the revelation. That is what God wants when He comes into 
His garden seeking fruit, from you, from me ;
likeness to Jesus. There 
is another of childhood’s hymns I have not given up singing even now, 

“
I want to be like Jesus, 
Meek, lowly, loving, kind.” 

12 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

That is what God wants. A man looks for figs from his fig-tree. God 

looks for humanity from His humanity, and He has that moral right 

of expectation. 

If we fail, who will deny His right to destroy, to cut down. That 

right is inherent in the meaning of humanity. A man who is not 

realizing that Divine ideal is cumbering the ground. It may be, my 

dear Sir, somebody living where you are living would exert an influ
ence of fruitfulness, and would benefit humanity ;
and you are 

taking up space, you are cumbering the ground. You are taking 

God’s resources, and prostituting them to base uses. Because you 

are not fulfilling the meaning of your own life, has He not the right 

to say, “
Cut it down ”
?
Then of course the great Lord Who uttered the parable is revealed 

to us as the intercessor. Mark carefully this one supreme fact. The 

ground of the plea of the intercessor is not pity. We do not understand 

it if we talk merely of pity. It is not a case of the woodman
sparing 

that oak because of the beauty of its foliage. If there are no figs, if 

there are no apples, if there is no humanity, Christ is not interfering, 

or asking God to let us off, or making excuse for failure,. No, He has 

received the right to dig about it and dung it, to disturb and fertilize 

the life, to come into contact with the barren fig-tree and make it 

fruitful. 

Then, if in spite of all He does for us, there still is no fruit, then 

He joins with the proprietor in the verdict of doom, “
Thou shalt 

cut it down.” 

What is the test then of life ?
Fruitfulness, according to the Divineintention. No, God is not swooping down upon people and provingthey were dreadful sinners, by
some calamity. He is expecting fruit. 
Oh !
wonderful imagery and matchless grace, He is introducing Himself 
as the vinedresser. He is waiting and able to take the deadest tree 
and make it live again, a fruitless human life, and make it blossom 
with beauty, and bear fruit. 

“
But if we still His call refuse, 

And all His wondrous love abuse: 

Soon must He sadly from us turn,

Our bitter prayer for pardon spurn.

Too late, too late, will be the cry,

When Jesus of Nazareth has passed by.” 

It behooves us to turn from all the false thinking of man about 
life, and its conditioning ;
and to find 
out God’s thought and its 
revealed purpose now and for ever, from this parable of the barren 
fig-tree. 

THE GREAT SUPPER I79
36. The Great Supper 
Luke xiv :
15-24 

HIS parable was uttered in the house of a ruler. Luke has recorded

Ta remarkable section (xiv.-xvii. IO), telling of happenings on one 

Sunday afternoon in the life of our Lord. I think it was the last 

Sunday in His public ministry, of which we have any record. This 

parable was given on that afternoon. 

Our Lord had been invited into the house of one of the rulers of 

the Pharisees to eat bread, and “ 
they were watching Him.” The first 

thing then suggested is that it was an occasion of hospitality, a 

Sabbath afternoon reception. At that time one mark of the degeneracy 

of the Hebrew people was that they encroached upon the Sabbath 

day for social reception. It is a mark of degeneracy to-day very often, 

in the Christian Church. Our Lord went to this house. We can go 

to such gatherings too if we do what He did there. Guests and host 

were there, and it is evident that the hospitality offered to Jesus, 

which He accepted when He went into the house, was of a sinister 

nature ;
because there was a man there whom no ruler would have 

asked, except for an ulterior reason-a man with dropsy. Luke tells 

us that they watched Jesus to see what He would do with that man. 

He healed him, and let him go. 

Then in that house, which was for the moment a house of hospi
tality, where guests were assembled, Jesus did the most unconventional 

thing on record. He first criticized the guests for their bad manners, 

and then His host for the false principle upon which he had issued 

his invitations. 

As He talked to them, He had spoken about a marriage feast, 
about dinner, and about supper. It was all in the realm of hospitality.
He was there in the house, with a sinister motive in the invitation ;
and the other guests were there, seating themselves round those three-
sided tables of those homes, where there was one place of pre-eminence. 
We are told Jesus marked how they chose the chief seats. The word 
”
marked ”
is a good translation, though it does not merely mean He 
saw. He watched them. They watched Him, but He watched them ;
and everything was in the realm of hospitality. 

As He criticized the guests and the host, He revealed two principles 
of social order. He revealed first that self-emptying is the true 
secret of exaltation. Office seekers were excluded ;
those wanting 
the chief places were dismissed. Those not seeking were to have the 
chief places in social life. Self-emptying is the secret of exaltation. 

Then when He turned to the host, He showed that self-emptying 
is the secret of hospitality. In that story there is one little word, twice 
repeated. “
Lest s
more 
honourable man than thou be bidden.” That 

180 PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

is the danger. When He came to the host He said, Do not call your 

friends and brethren, or your rich neighbours, “
lest haply
they also 

bid thee again.” But that is generally why we do ask people. We 

expect them to ask us again. Said Christ, If people act on that basis, 

they cut the nerve of hospitality. 

It was at that moment someone at that feast, said, “
Blessed is he 
that shall eat bread in the Kingdom of God.” There are different 
opinions what that exclamation really meant. Some look upon it as 
a satirical exclamation. Personally I believe strongly that it was a 
genuine excIamation
of admiration. Some person in that company 
listened to Him, and saw through the things He had said, things of the 
simplest, and yet most searching ;
an order of life quite different to 
the one with which people were familiar ;
a new social order altogether, 
in which the places of honour went only to honourabIe
people, an order 
of life in which hospitality was completely self-emptied, and never 
self-seeking. I think somebody saw it, and cried out;
“
Blessed is he 
that shall eat bread in the Kingdom of God.” It was an intelligentremark. A man saw that the order revealed was the order of the 
Kingship of God, and the Kingdom of God. Someone saw the beauty 
of the ideal, of a social order mastered by these principles. 

We come now to the parable. ” 
But He said unto him.” The 
parable was an answer to that exclamation, and becomes a most 
searching and revealing one. Our Lord took His story from the 
realm in which He found Himself, that of hospitality. There in the 
house the guests were gathered, bad-mannered ;
and a host who did 
not understand hospitality. It was a social occasion, a feast. Soour Lord said, in effect, Let Me tell you a story. This story was ananswer to that exclamation. 

What was the figure employed ? It was purely Eastern. A host 
prepares a supper, and issues his invitations to that supper. All the 
guests decline, making various excuses. Surely there was humour
in 
the heart of our Lord, as seen in the illustrations. The host was angry, 
and sent his servants with invitations to new guests, the poor, the 
maimed, the blind, and the lame. Notice these were the people whom 
He had told His host he should ask, when he made a feast. The reportwas made to him, This is done as thou commanded, and yet there is 
room. Then the last words of the host, “
Constrain them to come in 
that my house may be filled. For I say unto you, that none of thosemen which were bidden shall taste of my supper.” 

Taking that as a story, without thinking of any application for 
the moment, it is a most unusual one, and our Lord intended it to 
be such. Common experience would contradict it, that any host who 
had a supper, and sent out invitations, everyone invited should decline 
the invitation. Did a thing like that ever happen ? Immediately we 
are face to face with this fact, that implicated in the story is a recognition 
of hostility toward the host on the part of those who were 

181

THE GREAT SUPPER 

bidden. They began to make excuses. They were only excuses, but

they made them. They declined. They would not come. Why not ?

There is only one answer, that they did not like their host. One cannot 

argue anything else. The neglect lies deeper than that of a supper

table. There is some objection to the one who sent out the invitation.

Jesus told this unusual story when someone really admired theideal of the Kingdom of God. He did not deny what this person hassaid as to the blessedness of the Kingdom of God. In His great Manifesto 
He struck the key-note in the word “
Blessed,” happy, prosperous,
as the Greek word means. That is the purpose, the meaning of theKingdom of God, blessedness. Here in two social illustrations some 
man saw the new order, and said, There is the secret of happiness;
blessed is he who shall live under those conditions. Our Lord was not 
denying this. What was He doing ?
He was revealing the humanheart, and was saying to them in effect, Yes, men admire the ideal,
but they will not enter into that Kingdom ;
in spite of their admiration,
they are refusing to enter into it. To admire the ideal is one thing.
To accept it, submit to it, enter into its laws, is quite another. He 
was preaching that very Kingdom of God. That was the great burdenof His preaching from the beginning of His ministry, as it had been ofHis great predecessor, John the Baptist.

Take the story as a suggested revelation, bearing the Easternatmosphere. “
A certain man made a great supper.” The nature of 
the Kingdom of God is that it is a gift, offered to man, an invitation toenter into the true order of life, as a gift. Keep the simplicity of the 
story. In the back of the mind of our Lord He thought of God as aHost, and He has provided, as a gift of His love and grace, the feastof the Kingdom. It is a gift of grace.

What is the right of entry ?
What right had anyone at the feast?
None other than the invitation of the host. The whole thing being ofgrace, no one had any right there, and gate-crashers in the supper are 
put out. While the invitation constitutes a perfect right to the Kingdom 
of God, yet at last the host says, None of those that were biddenshall eat of my supper. Why not ?
Because they refused. Their ownrefusal was the reason of their exclusion. 

Our Lord in a marvellous way gave illustrations of excuses, notreasons. There is no reason amongst them. “
They all with oneconsent began to make excuse.” “
I pray thee,” literally, I pray youhave me begged off. What does the first man say ? He has boughtland, possessions, real estate. We are bound to say that these people,
on the level of human common-sense, were either liars or fools, everylast one of them. Fancy a man buying land, and then going to see.
it. Still that is what he said. He had to see his possession, real 
estate. 

The next man said, I have bought five yoke of oxen, and I go toprove them. Imagine it !
I
know it is said we must not look a gift 

182 PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

horse in the mouth, but one does so before buying one !
This man 

said he had bought oxen, and now was going to look at them. 

Then came that last man. He felt the matter was quite settled. 

“ 
I have married a wife, and therefore I cannot come.” 

What have we here ?
Possession, or wealth ;
commerce, or labour
;
emotion, or human affection ;
and those are the three things that to-day 

are keeping thousands out of the Kingdom of God. It was a simple 

story Jesus told, one that could have been translated into history all 

over that countryside ;
and He knew it. He said, These men all began 

to beg off. Why ?
The man who said he was going to see Iand,
was 

not truthful, The man who said he was going to look at the oxen he 

had bought, was lying. The man who said he had married a wife was 

a fool. Why did he not take her with him ?
There was some reason 

behind it all, and so there always is. God’s Kingdom is a great feast, 

“
Come, for the feast is spread ”
;
and the right of entry is His invitation, without money, without price. 
If we are excluded, it is because we refuse ourselves, and for no other 
reason ;
and if we refuse, why do we do so ? Get behind the excuses, 
and whether it is the passion for wealth, or consecration to commerce, 
or mastery by human affection, there is something else behind that 
in every case. The underlying reason of refusing to enter the Kingdom 
is hostility against God. The carnal mind is enmity against God. The 
carnal mind is the mind mastered by carnalities, by the flesh, by 
material things. It is wonderful how much can be shut out with an 
apparently small thing. A man can so put a golden sovereign beforehis eyes, as that he cannot see the sun or the world ;
and when men 
have put other things between themselves and God, the result is they 
become hostile to God, because they do not know Him, or understand 
Him. 

“ 
Blessed is he that shall eat bread in the Kingdom of God.” Who 
is there who would not be prepared to say that. Who is there who does 
not admire the ideal, illustrated here by our Lord in its entirety, that 
Kingdom wherein dwelleth righteousness and peace and joy ?
Who 
does not admit it ?
If we admit it, have we entered ?
Are we in it ?
That is what Jesus meant. We admire the ideal, but the story shows 
what men are doing. 

Of course the story had immediate application to the nation, to 
the fact that when those bidden ones of high privilege through the 
running centuries were refusing Him, He was opening the door to 
the poor, the maimed, the blind, and the lame ;
and compelling or 
constraining men everywhere to come in. 3ut
the supreme value of it 
is, Where am I ?
Am I in the Kingdom ?
If not, what is the excuse ? 
When next you are alone, and everyone else is shut out, find out the 
reason beneath the excuse. 

TWO PARABOLIC ILLUSTRATIONS 

37. Two Parabolic Illustrations 
Luke xiv :
25-35
wo PARABOLIC illustrations are found in this paragraph. It isTimportant again that we briefly review the circumstances. The 
twenty-fifth verse reads, ” 
There went with Him great multitudes.” 
Our Lord had left the house of the Pharisee where strange things had 
happened, and where He had found no congenial atmosphere. The 
hostility of the host was manifested in the presence there of the man 
with the dropsy, The behaviour of the guests was at fault, and the 
principle of the hospitality of the host was wrong, as Jesus had shown. 
Then in answer to that exclamation of one of the guests, Jesus had 
spoken that parable of the great supper, the intention of which was to 
show the reluctance of the human heart. Admiring the ideal, men were 
not prepared to submit to the conditions. That all happened in the 
house. 

Having left the house, our Lord now used two parabolic illustrations. 
He had moved away, and started on His journeyings. While He had 
been in that house, there were multitudes of people outside, who had 
been waiting for Him. These were the last months of our Lord’s 
public ministry, and by this time, wherever He went, the crowds went 
after Him, following Him from town to town, and village to village, 
eager, keen, interested, loving to hear Him, and to watch Him, and 
wanting to be near Him. In many cases, perhaps the majority, they 
felt they would like to be connected with Him, enrolled as His followers.
They were all waiting for Him, and “
there went with Him great 
multitudes.” The moment He came out of the house these waiting 
people outside were alert ;
and as He moved away, they went after 
Him. That is the significance of the next phrase, “
And He turned, and 
said unto them.” Upon this occasion He declared the terms of discipleship. 
It is almost like a fierce wind that blew across that crowd, unquestionably 
winnowing them. Yes, Jesus was winsome, but there 
was another aspect to His ministry, as well as winning. He was 
winnowing, and while He won those crowds, and they were interested, 
and were coming after Him, just as crowds do to-day, and are still 
doing, He turned round, and not this time only, superlatively, but 
constantly, He said things that blew like a wind of God across that 
crowd, thinning out those who wanted to be His followers. He gave 
them the terms of discipleship. 

There is a phrase here from the lips of Jesus thrice repeated in 
this paragraph. “
Cannot be My disciple ”
(v. 26). “
Cannot be My 
disciple ”
(v. 27). “
Cannot be My disciple ”
(v. 33). He was telling 
them that there were people who, however much they were interested 
in Him, were like the man left in the house, admiring His ideals, but 

184
PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

could not be His disciple. Who were they ?
I can never read these 

words without trembling, and wondering whether I am a disciple. I f 

any man were coming after Him, he could not do this unless he put 

loyalty to Him above the highest and finest and noblest loyalties of 

earthly love. It was a tremendous saying. He said unless a man do 

that, he could not be His disciple. Then to interpret what He meant 

by that saying, He declared, “ 
Yea, and his own life also.” Not only 

earthly loves, high, affectional loves, but the love of self, and the love of 

life. Then He interpreted that. “
Whosoever doth not bear his own 

cross ”
-that is failing to love self-” and come after Me, cannot be 

My disciple. ”
Then finally, to summarize everything, Unless a man 

“ 
renounceth not all that he hath, he cannot be My disciple.” 

Then something happened. This passage is only understood as we 
can see that crowd imaginatively. We need not travel to Palestine 
where He was at the time, nor need we go back nineteen hundred years 
to see it. Take any massed company of men and women gathered 
together to-day, in an evangelistic service, interested in Jesus, attracted 
towards Him, and having a feeling that they would like, in some 
measure, to be associated with Him. Then let the preacher, as the 
mouthpiece of the Master, declare these terms of discipleship, and 
then look at that crowd. They will be more attentive than ever for 
the moment ;
but if one is keen enough to discern the fact, there is a 
puzzled, almost restless look, and at last a protesting look, as though 
they would say, But surely those terms are severe ;
cannot it be made 
easier than that ? Cannot we be His followers, and listen to Him and 
admire Him, and rejoice in His power without such drastic measures ?
Humanity is just the same to-day as then. Jesus would say to themto-day, without any reservation, what He said to them in the olden 
days. That is the background of these illustrations. 

What then is the subject He was illustrating ?
Without any question 
He was showing the reason why His terms were severe. Men and 
women were looking into His face and saying, Why be so severe ?
He used two parabolic illustrations to show them the reason why. 

Look again at the illustrations. He said, “
Which of you, desiring 
to build a tower, doth not first sit down and count the cost, whether 
he have wherewith to complete it ? Lest haply,
when he hath laid a 
foundation, and is not able to finish, all that behold begin to mock 
him, saying, This man began to build, and was not able to finish.” 
The second illustration, “
Or what king, as he goeth to encounter 
another king in war, will not sit down first and take counsel whether 
he is able with ten thousand to meet him that cometh
against him 
with twenty thousand ? Or else, while the other is yet a great way off, 
he sendeth an embassage, and asketh conditions of peace.” 

To come now to a technicality. The next verse in the Authorized 
Version begins, ” 
So likewise whosoever he be.” That is an unfortunate 
translation, one that has misled the thinking of men generally as to 

TWO PARABOLIC ILLUSTRATIONS 
the meaning of these two illustrations. The Revised Version has

correctly translated the Greek phrase, which never meant ‘ 
likewise,” 

but “ 
So therefore.” What is the difference ?
If we read “
So like
wise,” then Jesus meant that just as the man going to build a tower,

and the king going to war, must both count the cost ;
so
must we if 

we are coming after Him. But out Lord said, ” 
So therefore.” He 

never told men to count the cost. They were to come at all cost, at

the cost of earthly love, and the cost of renouncing everything.

What then did He mean ?
That He had to count the cost, and that 

was why His terms were severe, in the interest of what He was doing.

“ 
So therefore.” Note the difference carefully between “
likewise ”
and “
therefore ”
in that passage. Notice also the repetition three

times over of the phrase, “ 
Cannot be.” Behind that “
cannot be ”
were instructions that proved to men that they were to stop bargaining

and counting the cost ;
that they were to trample on personal love and

ambition and all possessions. They were to come at all cost. Yet He 

showed the necessity of His counting the cost.

Take then, the two figures. First, building, the figure of construction. 
Building is the great symbol of construction. But He used asecond figure, war, and battle, and battle is destructive. Building isconstructive work ;
battle is destructive work. He said, If a man 
wants to do constructive work, to build a tower, he sits down first and 
counts the cost. If he does not do so, the purpose of his building willbe frustrated, and he will never be able to complete it, and men willlaugh at him. Some buildings have been called some man’s folIy.
Some man started to build, and he could not finish it, and carry outhis purpose. That was the first figure of speech.

Then a king going to battle, before he goes, if he is wise-and thisis pure political wisdom-he finds out whether every man in his armyis worth two of the enemy. That is a different mathematical formula 
of expressing the thought of the text, “
whether he is able with ten 
thousand to meet him that cometh 
against him with twenty thousand.”
He needs his every soldier to be equal to two of the enemy. That is our 
Lord’s estimate. Then that satirical word ;
if the king do not do that,
if his men are not of that quality, presently there will be an embassagesent to the opposing forces, asking for conditions of peace-surrender!
Building. If one does not count the cost, there will be failure andlaughter. Battle. If one does not take time to find out the qualityof the soldiers, there will be defeat ;
and conditions of peace will haveto be asked from the enemy. Those are the two figures of speech.
Our Lord had just uttered the terrifying terms of discipleship, and menwere inclined to protest. He said to them in effect, You wonder atthe severity of My terms. Let Me tell you why they are severe. Heused the two figures of speech, and asked them to think the matterthrough. What did He mean ?
That He was in the world to build. If 
any man were going to build, would he not count the cost, whether 

186 PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

he could carry out his purpose ?
That is what He was doing. That 

was why His terms were severe. He appealed to their own common
sense, to their own experience, and to their intelligence. They were no 

warriors or kings, but they knew enough of war. What king does not 

sit down and calculate, on the basis of the quality of his soldiers ?
What were the implications ?
Here our Lord was declaring His 
purpose in the world. He was here for building and battle. At 
Caesarea
Philippi, in other language, He had used the same terms in 
addressing Peter and the rest. “ 
On this rock I will build My Church,” 
-building. What next ?
“
And the gates of Hades shall not prevail 
against it,“-battle. The ultimate purpose of His presence was constructive 
;
but on the way to the completion of the work on which His 
heart was set, there were battles to be waged and won. He had told 
His disciples that He would build. He had told them He would 
conduct the campaign victoriously, that the gates of Hades should not 
prevail against it. Victory was in His mind. The fulfilment of purpose 
was there. He would build. Now He used the same figures in a slightly 
different application. 

Thus He was telling them that the purpose of, and the reason of 
the severity was the greatness of His own emprise; and the fact that 
in order to complete that building and win that battle, He must have 
resources and men upon whom He could absolutely depend. He was 
showing them that following Him meant more than personal advantage 
only. Personal advantage was secondary, and in the presence of 
His Cross was smitten out of sight as almost unimportant. Oh, the 
terror of it that we have so often made our salvation a kind of fire 
insurance, a way by which we may escape hell !
Following Jesus meantfar more than that, and this was what He was showing His disciples. 
To follow Him was to commit oneself to His enterprises, to 
stand by Him in the battle, to stand with Him in the battle, untilthe building is done, and the battle is won. 

I will use an old illustration. When Charles Haddon
Spurgeon
was 
exercising his marvellous ministry, and building up the Pastors’ College, 
he started a magazine, the title of which was The Sword and the Trowel. 
Nehemiah when building the wall of Jerusalem commanded the 
workers to grasp the sword as well as the trowel, to fight the enemies 
that would hinder the building. Spurgeon
knew that little incident 
of ancient Hebrew history was symbolic of the action of God through 
the Jews, and of the mission of Jesus Christ. Jesus came to build ;
and He came for battle. He had left the house of the Pharisee and 
found Himself surrounded by thronging multitudes interested in 
Him. As He started to move away, they came with Him. He turned, 
and halted them, and said in effect, What are you following Me for ?
Are you coming after Me ? I am in this world to build. I am in this 
world to battle. You are no good to Me unless you are of the right 
quality, the right calibre. I do not want followers coming after Me 

THE PARABLE OF LOST THINGS 

for their own sake. I want those committed to Me and to My enter
prises. That was the meaning of the illustrations. He it was Who had 

to count the cost, not they.

Thus by these very illustrations, by the use of these terms of

severity, our Lord emphasized the importance of quality. Quality is

always the thing that counts in the Church of God, and among the

disciples of Jesus, not quantity. We have such an unholy passion for 

quantity. We say, Great crowds go to that Church ;
it is a scene of 

success. Not at all. It may be that little chapel down in the valley,

or on the hillside, away in the Highlands, or in the vaheys
of Wales 

where the two and the three are gathered is of more use to God than

the great congregation simply attracted by something less than the

highest. It is quality that counts, and He wants quality, men and

women on whom He can depend, who are with Him, with sword in

hand, and who lay stone upon stone in the mighty building, men and

women who will stand there against all opposition.

 
The Son of God goes forth to war,
A Kingly crown to gain.
His blood-red banner streams afar, 
Who follows in His train ?
”
Let us get to our knees and ask if we are such upon whom He can

depend.

After He had uttered these words, the crowds still listening toHim, He ended with that vibrant challenge, marking the supremeimportance of what He had been saying, “
He that hath ears to hear,
let him hear.” Which words lead us to the fifteenth chapter, and toour next study. 

38. The Parable of Lost Things 
Luke xv :
j-32
T
T
HIS familiar chapter of Luke’s record contains one of the best-
known parables of our Lord. One phase of this, that of the lostson, usually referred to as the parable of the prodigal, has made agreater impression on human consciousness than any parabie
Jesus 
ever uttered. We do not now dwell upon the details of the parable,
but rather attempt to gather its values, asking first, what it was ourLord intended to illustrate here ;
secondly, looking at the figures ofwhich He made use ;
and finally gathering the teaching He intendedto give on this particular occasion.
This is one parable, with three pictures. Luke uses the expressionat the beginning, “ 
He spake unto them this parable.” There are 
stages in the pictures, but there is no break in the parable itself. First, 

I88
PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

then, what was the subject that our Lord was intending to illustrate ?
Reminding ourselves of the historic setting, this parable was utteredtowards the close of that memorable Sabbath day, of which Luke alonegives so full an account. Jesus had uttered His parable of the greatsupper, in the house of the Pharisee. He had used the two parabolicillustrations of building and battle, illustrating the reason for theseverity of His terms of discipleship ;
and at the end of the previouschapter there fell from His Iips those words, “
He that hath ears to 
hear, let him hear.” Going straight on with the narrative, Luke says,
“
Now all the publicans and sinners were drawing near unto Him forto hear Him.” He had uttered severe terms, interpreted in the figuresof building and battle, showing that He needed those with Him whoshould stand by Him in His building until the work was done ;
and 
in the war till the victory was won ;
and the publicans and sinnerspressed closer to Him ;
they drew near to hear Him.

But they were not alone in the crowd. ‘
The Pharisees and the 
scribes murmured, saying, This man receiveth sinners, and eateth withthem.” He let them come near Him. He did not stand aloof. Indeed,
He went so far as to sit down and eat with them. The scribes were 
the appointed moral teachers and interpreters of the law ;
and the 
Pharisees were the great ritualists and supernaturalists in the realmof religion. Both these criticized Him. The crowds, held in contemptby the rulers, were getting near Him, and He was receiving them.
The Pharisees and scribes were standing aloof, critical, uttering wordsof condemnation. We discover then, unquestionably, the subject whichour Lord wished to illustrate. He was first declaring the meaning andreason of His receiving sinners. That is what the Pharisees and scribes 
objected to. He received them, and the word is a very strong one. Hereceived them to Himself. He took them into close comradeship, andsat down, and had close fellowship with them, and He ate with them.
He was trying to show these critical rulers why He received sinnersand ate with them. He was interpreting to them the actions they werecriticizing. It is quite evident that the subject He wished to illustrate 
was not the manner of His own ministry and method ;
but rather 
the attitudes and activities of God in the presence of derelict humanity.
When we remember these things, then we are prepared to follow Him,
listen to His words, look at the pictures, and gather the teaching.

There are here four pictures :
three, and one more. Jesus first drew 
the picture of a shepherd and his lost sheep. He began by appealingto them, as was so constantly His custom. “
What man of you.” He 
told the story of a shepherd who had a hundred sheep, one of which,
no reason being given, had wandered and was lost. He declared that 
any true shepherd, if he had lost one sheep, would leave the ninetyand nine, and go into the wilderness, and find it. It was not the first 
time He had employed the figure of the shepherd. That, however, isthe first phase of this parable. 

THE PARABLE OF LOST THINGS 189
, 

Then next, a woman and her lost drachma, her piece of silver. 

As a picture there may be differing opinions as to its intention. One 

view is that this woman had lost a piece of current coin in the house 

She had ten, and had lost one. The story would lose nothing if that

were its meaning. I think, however, that there is something deeper in 

it. The women of that time often wore upon their brow a frontlet
that 

was called semedi.
It was made up of coins, in themselves perhaps 

largely valueless, each one of which might be worth xoid.,
or per
haps a little more ;
but under a shilling. But it was a coin that had 

stamped upon it the image of authority. Again here scholars differ as 

to the significance of the frontlet. Some hold that it was a frontlet
that revealed betrothal ;
and again others, that it revealed the marriage 

relationship. Whether it was of little monetary value or not, it was of 

priceless value to the woman who wore it. That is evidenced by the 

fact that she sought it diligently, sweeping the house, until she found it. 

I cannot imagine a woman sweeping a long time to find a shilling !
But I can imagine her searching diligently to find something which, 

to her, was a thing of beauty, and adornment, and suggestiveness. 

However, that is the picture. One coin out of ten, gone. The woman 

had lost that which perfected the symbolism of her frontlet. 

The third picture is familiar and beautiful, that of the father who 
lost his boy. But there is another. It is the final phase in this parabolic 
setting forth of Jesus. It is the picture of an unnatural son, who was 
upright and loyal by all the outward appearances of life, but who had 
no understanding of, or sympathy with, his father’s heart ;
and consequently 
held his brother in contempt. Undoubtedly there were 
such, as there always are. There is the merging of four figures.

What does it all mean ?
What did our Lord intend to teach ?
First of all, as we listen to Him telling those stories, keeping in mind 
that crowd of men about Him, and that crowd of pubhcans
and sinners 
pressing eagerly forward, conscious of their own failure and sin, yet 
eager to hear Him in spite of the severity of the terms He had uttered ;
as we listen to Him we gather what His outlook was upon humanity. 
He saw humanity lost. Whether it was the sheep, or the drachma, or 
the son, in His view each was lost. 

Take the first three phases. What an illustration is there of lost 
humanity. First, a lost sheep. A sheep is one of the most stupid 
things. It goes anywhere where it sees a gap. It does not stop to 
think. It cannot think. A gap appears in a fence, and the animal goesthrough it, and away it goes, wandering on, until it is lost upon the 
mountains, and does not know its way back. There are multitudes of 
people who exactly fit in with that description ;
lost from sheer 
stupidity. 

How was the piece of silver lost ? It was not to blame at all for 
being lost. There was something lost through the carelessness of others. 
Mark it well, lost at home, but lost. There are multitudes in our 

PARAELES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

Churches to-day who are lost at home through the carelessness of others. 

They are still somewhere about, but they have no purchasing power,

and they are making no contribution that is worth while to the great 

cause. They are lost through the carelessness of others. 

When we turn to the picture of the first son, we have a very

different story. This is not stupidity. This is not a losing throughthe carelessness of others. This is deliberate, self-centred pride. Thisis the lost son, representing those lost because they rebel against allrestriction and all order, and vainly imagine that away from God andChrist, and away from the Church, there is freedom, liberty ;
and theywill be able to express themselves. They go to the far country, awayfrom God and Christ and the Church and restriction, and they say,
Let us eat, drink, and be merry ;
and they go, and they are lost!
There is tremendous power in every phrase. He went into a farcountry, and spent his substance, which he had derived from his father.
He was spending what his father had given to him. Humanity awayfrom God is expending the forces which God has created in them, andcommitted to them. Every man who sins with his hand, foot, eye, ormind, is sinning with force that God has given to him to bless him,
and to make him. Men are prostituting their gifts, wasting theirsubstance ;
they are lost!
Then that sentence from the lips of our blessed Lord always seemsto have in it a biting satire. “
When he had spent all, there arose amighty famine in that country.” That does not necessarily mean therewas some physical famine. It may mean that if a man have spent allin London, there is a famine in London !
One can be in the midst of 
plenty, and yet find a famine. He joined himself to a citizen of that 
country. He was not going home yet ;
not he !
He was going to faceit out. And “ 
he sent him into his fields to feed swine.” We may notget the force of that, for we are not Jews. He gave him the lowestand most degrading and humiliating thing to do. And “
he would fain 
have been filled with the husks that the swine did eat ;
and no 
man gave unto him.” I never read that sentence without thinkingall the nobility was not gone from him even then. I know men who,
if no man gave to them, they would have helped themselves. He did 
not. He suffered hunger.

But “ 
he came to himself.” It is a great hour when a man comesto himself, when substance is gone, and friends are gone, and thepossibility of finding food is gone. There is nothing left. He came to 
himself, and that is when reason dawned again. He began to think.
He was lost. That is Christ’s outlook. He was lost through his owndeliberate choice and pride.

Yet there is another picture there. Another son is out in the fields 
doing his work, attending to the affairs of the estate, and very proudof what he is doing. He hears the sound of music and dancing, and 
makes enquiries, and a bond-slave tells him, Your brother is home. 

THE PARABLE OF LOST THINGS 

My brother I
Notice this, Jesus never called this man a brother. He 
called the other man his brother, but He never called him the otherman’s brother. It is a slight matter, but worth noticing. He was lost. 
He did not know his father. He did not know his father’s heart. 
He was lost in his father’s country ;
duteous, and a man can be lost 
there, as well as everywhere else. The lost sheep-a stupid thing. 
The lost piece of silver, guiltless, being lost through the neglect of 
others. The lost son, rebellious man. The lost son, so concerned with 
duty that he had no fellowship with his father, with God. The outlook 
on humanity-lost!
Where is the emphasis I
On the word lost in each case, not on the 
condition of the thing lost. The emphasis lies in agony upon the heartof the one who has lost. The shepherd is suffering more than thewandering sheep. The woman is suffering because the silver is lost.
It is the father who knows the depth of agony when that boy is away.
It is the father who knows the pain of having a son who does notunderstand. Lost, the possession gone, the purchasing power of thecoin, or its significance from the standpoint of order and beauty, gone.
Love deeply wounded by the wanderer, and the hide-bound vanity ofself-pity.

If that is the Lord’s outlook upon humanity, what is His relationof God ?
All the stories merge and blend. The lights of the Urim andThummim are flashing in rainbow splendour through these stories.
He first shows that God is mindful of His own, and He has neverforgotten. That shepherd did not forget the one sheep, though hepossessed the ninety and nine. Neither has God. That woman did not 
forget the silver, though she had lost it through her own carelessness.
And the father had never forgotten that boy. The sentences here are 
so beautiful. “
While he was yet afar off, his father saw him .
.
.
and 
ran.” Is there any lack of dignity to see an old man running ?
Do not 
believe it. Why did he not stay and wait and retain his dignity ?
He 
could not. I declare that there is no dignity greater than the runningof a father to meet his boy. That is God. 

But there is more than that, of course. It is revelation of Godacting for the recovery of that which was lost ;
the journey of theshepherd. The phrase is enough.

 
None of the ransomed ever knew 
How deep were the waters crossed. 
Nor how dark was the night that the Lord passed through,
E’er He found the sheep that was lost.” 

That is God. The search within the dwelling is God seeking by HisSpirit. The woman is the instrument, but the inspiration is Divine.
Then we see the picture of God in the father, welcoming the boy.
It is wonderful to see that when the boy got back, he found that whichhe had left home to find in the far country, and had not found there. 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

He went into the far country to have a good time. Judged by the 

days in which we live, he expected to have fine clothes, and jewellery. 

When he got back home, the father called for the best robe, a ring on 

his hand, and shoes on his feet. He got these when he came home. 

He lost them in the far country. He expected food, and variety of 

menu, and he came to an hour when nobody would give him husks. 

But when he got home, they killed the fatted calf. He went to the 

far country to be free from restraint, and he found disillusionment. 

When he came back he found merriment, gladness, restoration. 

Then we come to that other man in the field. How we have tried 

to explain him. What varied explanations have been given. There is 

no explanation that is final. It has been said that he represented the 

Jew, and the other son the Gentile. To me that is far-fetched. I am 

sure He intended an illustration of the men criticizing Him, the scribes 

and Pharisees. But whatever we have said about the elder son, the 

father did not say anything unkind to him. “
Son, thou art ever with 

me, and all that is mine is thine.” He went out and entreated him to 

come in. ‘He was as concerned about that son as about the one who 

had been away. All he said to him was in the nature of a tender and 

gentle appeal. That was the revelation of God that He gave to those 

who were listening. 

Then look at them again, Pharisees and scribes. What did all 
that mean, or what did He intend it should mean for them ?
I have 
no means of knowing if any understood Him. Any interpretation of 
religion which holds derelict humanity in contempt is the worst form 
of irreligion. To hold in contempt the unwashed multitudes outside is 
the most irreligious thing of which a man can be guilty. Such attitude 
demonstrates ignorance of God, and consequently failure to appreciate 
the true value of humanity. 

What about those publicans and sinners, and those listening crowds. 
To them it was a message of hope, it was a revelation of love, it was 
a call to faith. Oh, matchless parable, shining with all the glories of 
the grace of God ;
rebuking all that religion which is merely devoted 
to duty, and ethical, and cold, and dispassionate !
Oh, wondrous 
parable, wooing the sinner, the failure, and the wanderer back to the 
Father’s heart and home !
39. The Unrighteous Steward 
Luke xvi :
1-13
T
T
HERE is a certain unusualness about this parable which has oftentimes 
given pause to interpreters and expositors. A superficial 
reading of it might leave the impression on the mind that our Lord, 
by using this figure of speech, was condoning a fraudulent proceeding. 

THE UNRIGHTEOUS STEWARD I93
That impression is impossible, and incorrect by a careful reading of 

the whole story. We note first, then, the subject which our Lord was 

intending to illustrate ;
secondly, the figure He employed in the story 

He told ;
and from that twofold consideration we deduce the teaching 

for all time. 

When our Lord used this parable, what subject was He intending 

to illustrate ?
That is an important question, in view of the possible 

difficulty created by a superficial reading. To see the subject He was 

intending to illustrate, we must once again go back to the context. 

We find ourselves still in the last Sabbath afternoon recorded by Luke 

(xiv.-xvii. IO).
Here, then, first notice that the words of this whole 

paragraph were addressed to His disciples, though not to them alone. 

That is found in the opening verse of the chapter, “
And He said also 

unto the disciples.” He had spoken the parable of the lost things 

specially to the criticizing scribes and Pharisees, but also to the listening 

crowd of publicans and sinners. Now continuing, without any break, 

“ 
He said also unto the disciples.” This is the first thing to be noticed. 

That little word “
also ”
is significant, indicating that He was not 

leaving out those scribes and Pharisees, and the listening multitudes ;
but He was specially addressing Himself to those close to Him, His 

own disciples, in the hearing of the rest. 

Glance on to the fourteenth verse of this chapter. We read, “
And 
the Pharisees, who were lovers of money, heard all these things.” They 
were listening, “ 
and they scoffed at Him.” He spoke then to His 
disciples immediately after He had uttered the threefold parable, in 
answer to the criticism of His attitude towards sinners by the Pharisees 
and scribes. Why did they scoff at Him after they heard this parable 
of the unjust steward-and His application of it ?
We are told the 
reason, “ 
They were lovers of money.” That lay behind all this criticism 
of Jesus on the part of all these rulers :
“ 
lovers of money.” Not 
money, but the love of it. The Bible never says money is the root of 
evil, but the love of it. “ 
The love of money is a root of all kinds of evil,” 
is a very profound saying. He was talking in the hearing of these 
men, to the disciples especially, but to these men also who were lovers 
of money. That was the motive behind everything, the motive of their 
criticism of Him, and of their aloofness from the unwashed multitudes 
and sinning crowd. They were “ 
lovers of money.” He talked about 
money, and began with a story. 

We see therefore that the subject illustrated was that of motive, 
the method in the use of mammon, that is, of material possessions. 
Our Lord had much in His teaching of the larger life, and the world 
beyond this, and spiritual verities ;
but here He was dealing literally 
with the subject of money ;
talking to His disciples, but in the presence 
of men whose master passion was money, wealth, possessions. That 
is why He told them this story, and applied it as He did. 

What a strange story it was. Look at it carefully. It was a story 

13
.
PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

194
of two rogues. Two ? Yes. Who were they ? The steward whodefrauded his master, and his master who condoned the sin. He was 
as big a rogue as the steward. If a man condones sin in another he is 
partner with the rogue, even though the rogue be his servant, if hecommends him for his wrong-doing. We must be careful in readingthe story. Many have become perplexed when they reach the eighth 
verse, “
His lord commended the unrighteous steward.” But it is“
his lord,” not “
the Lord.” Our Lord did not commend him. He 
had no commendation for that action. It is an arresting fact, however,
that his lord commended him. 

What do we see 1
First of all cleverness practised. This stewardwhen he discovered that he was found out, was perplexed at first.
He said, “
What shall I do ?
”
There is really a note of exclamationhere, a sudden discovery in what he said, “
What shall I do ?
”
“
I 
am resolved what to do.” He was in difficulty. He had been defraudinghis master, but when he was found out, he looked at the situation. He 
had lost his job. “
I have not strength to dig.” The lack of strengthwas probably disinclination to work. It often is. “
To beg I amashamed.” That was pure pride. Then suddenly,-1 know what Iwill do. I will defraud him a little more to my own advantage, in orderthat the people who will reap the benefit, will take me in, when thelord, my master, has cast me out. So he proceeded, “
How much owest 
thou unto my lord ? A hundred measures of oil. Take thy bond ... 
and write fifty.” ”
How much owest thou ?
A hundred measures 
of wheat. Take thy bond and write fourscore.” I have often wondered 
why in one case he suggested a fifty per cent. reduction, and only atwenty per cent. in the other. Probably he knew the situation of thosepeople, that some were better off than others. It was extremely clever.
His lord commended him for his wisdom, rather, for his prudence, his 
smartness. Cleverness practised, and admired !
There is no record 
that the lord reinstated him. He simply looked at what he had done.
He was clever. 

But Jesus told us why he commended him. Mark the word “
for I
in the middle of verse eight. He commended the unrighteous stewardbecause he had done wisely, smartly. Why did he do it ? “
For the 
sons of this age are for their own generation wiser than the sons oflight.” There is no word there of approval for the action of the stewardor his lord, but there is a declaration that on the earth level, for thisage, the sons of this age are wiser than the sons of light. The action 
of this steward, and that of his lord in admiration were actions influenced 
by the fact that their thinking was bounded by the age inwhich they were living, and bounded by their own generation, It was 
purely selfish ;
a selfish steward and a selfish lord, both lovers ofmoney, because they were looking at things from the standpoint ofthe present age, limited by their own generation. The sons of lightare those who are not limited in their outlook by the present age, and 

THE UNRIGHTEOUS STEWARD I95
are not limited in their calculations by the generations in which they 

live. The sons of light are those who see far more than the near. 

Yet Jesus said-and this is the arresting, the acid thing-that for 

their own age and generation, the sons of the age are wiser than the 

sons of light. Note that intended contrast of our Lord. There they 

are, the sons of the age, of their own generation, with limited outlook, 

a certain rich man and his steward. They saw nothing before their 

birth, and they did not see that very clearly, but they knew it was a 

fact ;
and they saw nothing beyond the end, and they were not very 

much concerned about that. They were living in the age, in their 

generation. That was the limitation. 

The sons of light are those who see far more than that. They see 
far more than the near. Peter, when describing certain people, wrote 
in one of his letters, “
seeing only what is near.” What a condemnation 
that is. I commend to thought the word of the Old Testament, “
The 
eyes of the fool are in the ends of the earth.” People say it means that 
a fool is a man who, instead of attending to things near him, is engaged 
in things in the ends of the earth. That is not what it means. He 
is a fool because he sees nothing beyond the ends of the earth. He is 
bounded by the material. He is acting as though the earth were all, 
and the generation everything, and the age in which he is living is the 
only thing that matters. The sons of light see beyond. They see the 
earth, they see the near ;
but they walk ,in
the light. The Light is 
now shining upon men, the One Who said, “
I am the light of the world ;
he that followeth Me shall not walk in the darkness.” They see the 
near, but they always see more. They put upon to-day the measurements 
of eternity, upon the dust the values of Deity, upon the agethe measurement of undying ages, upon the generation, “
the generation 
of the age of the ages.” Sons of light 1
It is a descriptive phrase. 

If that contrast is seen, what was our Lord doing ? While He had 
in mind those critical Pharisees who were lovers of money, He also 
saw the group of disciples round about Him, and His words constituted 
a rebuke. He was rebuking them because of their absence of acumenin the highest things. Look at this rogue. See the cleverness with 
which he manipulated things. But said Jesus-and He spoke with 
infinite knowledge and understanding-on the earth level, within the 
boundaries of the age and the generation, they are so bounded ;
but 
they are more astute, more filled with acumen than the sons of light, 
who are supposed to be living with the measurements of eternity placed 
upon all the things of time. 

We cannot finish there, because all He said in immediate connection 
has its bearing. He then gave them instruction on the right use 
of money, of mammon. Notice first with great care the nature of 
mammon. The word mammonghere
signifies material wealth. We 
are justified in saying money, because that is the symbol of wealth. 
He said to those listening to Him, Make friends by means of the 

196
PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

mammon, or money, of unrighteousness, a phrase that needs careful 

understanding. Mammon He called the wealth that was possessed

by that rich man, the thing that the rogue had been trafficking with 

to his own advantage, “ 
the mammon of unrighteousness.” 

What is “
the mammon of unrighteousness ”
?
What is the meaning 

of unrighteousness there ?
Not wickedness, but the absence of wicked
ne6s
;
not goodness, but the absence of goodness. In other words, the 

mammon of unrighteousness is neither moral nor immoral ;
it is non-

moral. Mammon, or money, is an instrument, an agent for good or for 

evil. Everything depends on how it is used, and how we use it depends 

upon how we think in our deepest life. Nothing reveals the thinking 

of a man more clearly than the use he makes of money. Our Lord 

had one thing to say. Make friends to yourself by means of it. That 

is an alteration from the Authorized rendering. He never told men 

to make friends of mammon, but to make friends by means of it. So 

use money as to make friends. Friends ?
Yes. A man may say, I 

have got some money, but I want it for myself. Is he using it for 

himself alone ?
Christ said, Do not use it that way. Make friends by 

means of it. So use wealth as to gather friends. 

Then mark how He swept out beyond the age and the generation. 
”
That when it “-the mammon a man has made use of-” shah
fail, 
they,” the friends made by the use of it-“ shall receive you into 
the eternal tabernacles.” He is beyond the age and the generation. 
He is looking at the vastness of the life that lies beyond, and He is 
saying plainly, So make use of money as to make friends who will 
greet us on the other side of the line that divides between this life 
and the eternal ages. Make friends by means of the mammon ofunrighteousness, for it shall fail. It always does. We can use it, and 
it is still there, but we have used it, whether we have got it, or someone 
else. We that use it, and the others that get it, will die on the earth 
level ;
and then, as Jesus in another parable said of the rich fool, 
“
Then whose shall these things be ?
”
Oh that wonderful list of wills 
and bequests in our papers. I would fain write that word of Jesus 
over every such list. Men die, and leave a hundred thousand, twenty 
thousand, five thousand, ninety pounds !
“
Leave !
”
What had 
they done with it when they were here ?
Were they so making friends 
that they were met by them on the other side ?
Many call the hymn 
doggerel, but there is a truth in it. 

“
Will anyone there at the Beautiful Gate, 
Be watching and waiting for me ? ”
Have we done anything with the wealth, the means we have, to getready for that day that lies beyond ?
See how He linked the now with the forever, the present with the 
eternal. When He had made that direct application to the use of 
money, and had shown the true use of it, He gave the principle of 

THE RICH MAN AND LAZARUS I97
fidelity ;
faithful to the much, in order to be faithful in the little. If 

we want to be faithful in the little things, the mammon, we must be

faithful in the big things, the much of eternity and God, and relationship

thereto. 

Then He gathered everything up in that sentence that stands for

ever blazing in light. “ 
Ye cannot serve God and mammon.” How 

this comparison of Jesus remains true. How much there is in the world 

to prove its truth to-day, that the sons of the age are more acute, are

more business-like, have more acumen than the sons of light. Many

a tine business-man on the earth level, honourable and capable, becomes

a fool when he enters into the business of the Christian Church. If all 

the acumen and business ability of the members of the Christian Church

were consecrated in the light as they are dedicated to the earth level,

there would be no Missionary Society problems, and no other missionary

problems. It remains true, sons of light are failing to walk according

to the light, lacking wisdom, and there is no more revealing symbol

than money, and the use men make of it.

Many years ago I remember in the home of a very wealthy man,

who was a Church member and a Christian, one morning at Family

Prayers he was eloquent and tender as he prayed for the salvation

of the heathen, and for the missionaries. He was startled beyond

measure when the prayer was over, one of his boys, a lad of ten, said

to him, “ 
Dad, I like to hear you pray for the missionaries.” He 

answered, “ 
I am glad you do, my boy.” And the boy replied, “
But 

do you know what I was thinking when you were praying, if I had your

bank book, I would answer half your prayers!
”
Two motives. The one, love of money, which is love of self, andforgetfulness of the needs of others. The other, love of man, whichis always the outcome of the love of God. How are we using anythingGod has committed to us ?
Is the true passion of life, love of self, orlove of man, because we love God ?
40.
The Rich Man
and Lazarus 
Luke xvi: 19-31
HERE is a sense in which even the Christian and instructed heartTwould fain pay no attention to this story. There is something init from which the mind instinctively recoils. If that be our reaction,
we do not recoil from it any more than God does. That picture ofthe condition of the human soul beyond the narrow span of this lifeis not a picture of what God wills for the human soul. It is a partof that which was described by one of the ancient prophets as “
the 
strange act ”
of God. It is a revelation of things eternal and necessary;
and the Biblical Revelation would play false to human experience and 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

understanding if it veiled some of these things from our eyes, becauseof reluctance to consider them. 

The question arises as we approach this story, was this a parable,
or was it the record of an actual event ?
Some believe that it was such 
a record, and that it shouId
not strictly be treated as a parable, becauseLuke does not call it such, and because our Lord began with an apparently 
definite statement, “ 
There was a certain rich man.” He did 
not name him, but continuing, He did name the beggar. It is the 
only case in all the parables where He used a name. It may be thiswas a statement of an actual case, which He had seen, and which 
perhaps those listening to Him, had seen. I do not dogmatize, but thatposition applies equally to the story of the unrighteous steward, whichwe have considered. Jesus began then in exactly the same way,
“ 
There was a certain rich man.” He did not name him, or his steward. 
That is the only difference in the method between this parable andthat. But if these were actual cases known to Jesus, that He usedthem parabolically there can be no doubt whatever. We shall therefore 
consider this story as parabolic, whether from actual life, or animaginary picture, as so often, does not really matter.

What was the subject then He was intending to illustrate ?
Consider 
quite simply the figure He employed, and from those two thingsattempt to deduce the special teaching.

In reading this story there are two perils we must avoid. We have 
no right to leave anything out of the story that is in it. Secondly wehave no right to read into it anything which is not found therein.
These two principles are vital. Some have been dogmatic on the question 
of duration, which may be suggested. There is nothing here towarrant any such position. Going as far as our Lord has gone, weconsider first the story only, and we ask, What subject was it Jesuswas intending to illustrate ?
He never told a story without a purpose,
and that purpose is always discoverable in the context. Looking backat the fourteenth verse we read that ‘
the Pharisees who were lovers 
of money, heard all these things.” What things ? The teaching Hehad been definitely and specially giving to His disciples, which foundits culmination in His command, ”
Make to yourselves friends by meansof the mammon of unrighteousness,” and when it (the mammon) faiIs,
they (the friends made) shall receive you into the eternal habitations.
He had uttered that culminating dictum, “
Ye cannot serve God and 
mammon,” and when the Pharisees heard these things, because theywere lovers of money, they laughed at Him, “ 
they scoffed Him.” The 
Greek word is a strong one. It means not merely that they smiled,
but with ribald mockery they laughed at Him, mocked Him, at theidea of the relation between material and spiritual wealth. That led 
to this story, though not immediately, for in the verses preceding thenineteenth, we find that He unmasked their motive and their method, 
unmasking the reason why they laughed at His interpretation of the 

THE RICH MAN AND LAZARUS I99
relative values between material wealth and spiritual, between mammonand the fear of God ;
and the reason was as He said, that they livedin the sight of men, instead of in the sight of God.

Then continuing, He showed how they were unfaithful in much, ingreat things, and consequently they were not to be trusted in the verylittle. Again there is the contrast between the spiritual and thematerial, between the eternal and the temporal, between the much oflife in its vastness and all the ages, and the very little of life conditioned 
in dust, on the material level. He told them men unfaithful in the 
much were unfaithful in the little, and the relation of the much to the 
very little, of the spiritual to the material, is the relation of time toeternity ;
and so the relation of money and its possession to the lifethat lies beyond. That was the occasion of the story. In connectionwith those solemn and revealing words, He said, “
There was a certain 
rich man.” 

In this story we find the one occasion when our Lord stretched outHis hand, and drew aside the veil that hangs between the now andthe hereafter, and allowed men to look and see not merely what laybeyond, but the intimate relationship between the now and the then,
between the here and the hereafter. 

Take the story quite simply. Jesus drew a contrast between two 
men living on earth, on two entirely different levels. The one waswealthy, living in luxury and ostentation. It is significant that there 
is not a thing against this rich man, measuring him by the standardsof time. We are not told that he was vulgar, though he was terriblyso, as every man is who is living only on the level of the dust. No 
court of law in England would have put this man on trial. The thingswe usually classify as vulgar sins are not in sight. There is no suggestion 
that he was living a depraved life, but he was rich. That was not 
wrong. He was clothed in purple. and fine linen. Those are smallexpressions, but in the East that meant the elements and things manifesting 
his riches. They spoke of abounding wealth. Even when it issaid that the beggar was laid at his gate, the word used is @?on,
which 
means a gate full of artistry and exquisite beauty. He lived there in 
wealth and luxury. The revealing word of course is this, “
faringsumptuously every day.” A marginal note says, “
Living in mirthand splendour every day.” There is only one word that conveys thatin English, flamboyantly. What does that mean ? Living ostentatiously, 
in abounding wealth, dressed in purple and fine linen. Weare told that a robe of fine linen was worth six times its weight in gold.
These simple .statements
are intended to show a man on the earth 
level, lacking nothing, enjoying everything, and especially enjoyingthe fact that he possessed, and could show it in ostentatiousliving-
flamboyant living. We are told that the beggar lay at his beautifulgate, and would fain be filled with the crumbs that fell from his table.
Possibly he was, but certainly the rich man knew nothing about it, 

200
PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

or if he did and suffered it, there was no credit to him. When we allow 

beggars or paupers to have things we do not want any more, there is 

no crpdit
to us, rummage sales notwithstanding!
What about the other man ? There is no more poignant picture of

abject poverty than that man, living in hunger, evidently lacking the

necessities of life, and the nourishment of the body, so that he was full

of sores. We are not told how he came to be there. There is no dealing

with social conditions. They were there, or that man had never been

in that position. There is no blame attached to circumstances and

environment, and none is suggested as attaching to the man. As a

matter of fact, the issue, when he crossed over, proves he was a godly

man, that he believed in the God of Abraham. Poor, weak, so far 

down, that the rough pariah dogs had pity on him, and with healing

salve, licked his sores. There is no contrast more remarkable than 

that of two men on the earth level. 

But our Lord had not finished His story, and those two men had

not finished. Something came to them both. What was it ?
“
The 

beggar died.” “ 
The rich man also died.” They both died ;
and all 

the ostentatious splendour of the rich man could not buy off the rider

on the pale horse, when he approached his beautiful gate. He died. 

And the beggar could not escape, had he so desired to do, the lot that

was common. He died. That is how it ends for all, you Pharisees,

pubbcans,
and sinners, Christ might have said. Death is coming. Now 

draw the veil and look beyond. Is there any difference ?
Yes. 

What did He say about the rich man when he died ?
He “
was 
buried.” Was the beggar buried, we ask ?
I do not think so. A 
beggar of that type, completely destitute, alone, covered with sores,
at last breathing out his spirit in all his poverty, in those times wasnot buried. Almost inevitably the cleaners passed the dead body,
unknown, unclean, and hurried him away in the early dawn until theycame to Tophet, Gehenna, the rubbish and refuse heap of fire, wherethey flung the body in. That is a known fact of the time, and the veryfact we are not told he was buried, leads us to suppose such an end forhim. The rich man was buried, on the earth level, and one wondershow much the funeral cost !
I have no doubt it harmonized with the 
kind of life he had lived. 

Is that all ?
No, that is not all. What about the beggar ?
In 
Hades he was “ 
comforted.” Our Lord used a Jewish figure of speech,
Hades, the place of departed spirits. The rich man was in Hades. So 
was the beggar. They were both there in Hades. That is not Hell,
the place of torment. The rich man was in Hades, in torment, andthe beggar was in Hades and was comforted ;
one great realm that ofthe departed spirits, clearly divided as Jewish theology taught, andwe believe. On one side, to use a geographical expression, the spiritsof the evil, the spirits of the lawless, of the rebellious, those who haveforgotten and rebelled against God. On the other side, the souls 

THE RICH MAN AND LAZARUS 

under the altar, a Hebrew figure of speech used in the Apocalypse;
souls in Abraham’s bosom, the souls of the righteous, who on the earth

level trusted in God, and were obedient to God, and walked in the

ways of Jehovah. They both passed into Hades, but their experience

there was different. 

The beggar was comforted. That is a great word, $arakaleo.
He 

was called near. The rich man was tormented, that is, in anguish,

and the root of the word means the uttermost dejection, sinking. The 

one man was called near to Abraham‘s bosom, and to the God Who he

had served. The other man buried and banished, sinking with. the 

treatment and
the torture resulting from his neglect of God. That is 

the picture.

What has this story to say to us ?
Take the simple plain facts.

By that picture and that story our Lord insisted upon the fact first of

existence beyond the article which men call death. Dying is the end

of earthly and conscious opportunities and activities. Beyond that,

however, personality and consciousness continue, whether it is that of

the rich man, or the beggar. Crossing over the boundary line that

we speak of as death, they are not extinct, and they are conscious.

That is the first tremendous truth that is taught by the story.

The next is that the conditions beyond, result from life as it islived on the earth level. The one had left behind him the things inwhich he gloried and boasted and had paraded. All the flamboyantliving was over. It was left, the purple and the fine linen, to the moths,
and the wealth to quarrelling relatives, if we are to believe humanityis the same, and it is. He went out into eternity a pauper, and apauper stripped. The little left, he lost the much that was never 
possessed. It was too late to gain possession. The other man crossingover was drawn near to the much, near to the spiritual, near to theeternal, near to the heart of the God of law, Who is the God of love,
drawn near to reality, drawn near to God. The condition beyond wasthe result of the method of life here. 

One more thing, and perhaps the most arresting of all, We have 
the conversation as Jesus described it, between this rich man andAbraham. We hear that haunting cry, as the rich man said concerninghis brethren, “
If one go to them from the dead, they will repent.”
Then this startling and amazing answer of Abraham as recorded byour Lord, “
If they hear not Moses and the prophets, neither will
theybe persuaded, if one rise from the dead.”

In other words, Life is never affected by the miracles, if it is notaffected by the moral. Does that seem a little hard to believe ?
Does 
it not seem as though if Lazarus had been sent, those brethren wouldhave repented ?
All the facts of the case are against it, and prove thetruth of what Jesus said. A little later on, another man bearing thesame name, Lazarus, was raised from the dead. What effect had it on 
these men ?
They tried to kill him. Finally Jesus Himself was raised 

202 PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

from the dead. What effect did it have ?
None upon those who wereliving on the earth level, save as they repented and turned. They putHim to death, and when He was raised from the dead, they becamebusy trying to put to death all those who followed Him. A tremendous 
truth this. The spectacular and the miraculous will not have anyeffect upon the life of men and women if the moral has failed to appeal. 

41.
The UnproJitable
Servants 
Luke xvii : s-10
HE' SUBJECT of this parable is that of unprofitable servants. InTclose connection with it, however, our Lord used a parabolicillustration, that of the grain of mustard seed. Notice at verse seven 
the use of the little word, “ 
But.” ” 
But who is there of you.” That 
shows the connection, and that the parable must be taken with theparabolic illustration.

We consider then first the subject our Lord intended to illustrate;
secondly, glance at the figures employed; and finally, attempt to deducethe teaching from the consideration.

What was the subject illustrated when our Lord used the figure ofthe grain of mustard seed, and the parable of unprofitable servants?
Whatever He said was in answer to an appeal of the apostles. Therequest came specially from the twelve, whom He had chosen andappointed to be with Him, and whom He had sent forth ;
whom He 
was training throughout His’ministry for their responsibilities in thedays that lay ahead. ” 
The apostles said unto Him, Increase our faith.”
What followed was an answer to that appeal, which appeal had followedteaching He had been giving them. At the commencement of thisseventeenth chapter He had told them that it was impossible but thatoffences
should come, and had warned them with great solemnity“
Woe unto him, through whom they come !
It were well for him if 
a millstone were hanged about his neck, and he were thrown into thesea, rather than that he should cause one of these little ones to stumble.
Take heed to yourselves ;
if thy brother sin, rebuke him ;
and if he 
repent, forgive him. And if he sin against thee seven times in the day,
and seven times turn again to thee, saying, I repent ;
thou shalt forgivehim. And the apostles said unto the Lord, Increase our faith.” Therequest that came from them was an intelligent one, born of their senseof the tremendous urgency of His commands at this point, and of thedifficulty to human nature that they would encounter, in attemptingto obey them. They did not feel they were equal to that high level towhich they were to attain. “ 
Increase our faith.” I think intelligenceis marked in the fact that what they asked for was an increase, not

.of
love, but of faith. It was an apprehension on their part that life 

THE UNPROFITABLE SERVANTS 

could only be equal to the demands of Jesus by faith, by that activity

of the human soul that takes hold upon the invisible. ”
Increase our 

faith.” It was a great thing they said to Jesus.

That being admitted, we listen to Him as He answered their 
request. The answer cannot be studied without seeing that our Lordwas recognizing the reason for the weakness of which these men wereconscious. He knew, He always knows, and always deals, not withour request upon the surface, but with what lies behind it. That is 
what He was doing here. They did not need their faith increased;
they were not needing quantity, but quality. If they had faith as agrain of mustard seed. He detected that, lying behind their requestfor an increase of faith which should enable them to fulfil the severityand sternness of His demands, was a hope that if they could gain thispower, some increase of faith, there would be some reward followingit, there would be some virtue in it, some benefit, following such anattainment that would come to them. This He knew, so His reply inparabolic illustration and parable was based upon a recognition of thereasons for their weakness, and these were the subjects that He illustrated. 
Faulty faith results from wrong motives. True faith issuesin right motives.

Take the two figures. First, a grain of mustard seed. In the parabolic 
discourses of Jesus in Matthew xiii., He used the same figure inanother application, and with another purpose. He then said of the 
grain of mustard seed, “
which indeed is less than all seeds.” He now 
took this very little thing, and said to these men their faith should belike it. What is the principle involved in that ? What is there in a 
grain of mustard seed ?
In the previous parable He had said the seed,
least of all the seeds, grew. There we are face to face with the principle,
which is that of life. He was insisting upon the life principle in thegrain of mustard seed, and because of that, in its development, it willproduce results.

There was an interesting picture in a recent paper of a curiousgrowth, of an enormous piece of statuary split in two, because a seedhad been dropped there, and as it developed and grew, its roots goingdownward, gathered force, and it had split the masonry, and finallythe statue. No application was made of it. It was simply a curiouspicture. However it is interesting, in the light of an old story of agranite tomb in Italy, where a man was buried many years ago, whowas flippant in his agnosticism to faith and to Christianity especially.
He had given instructions that a slab of granite weighing many tonsshould be placed over the place of his burial, so that there should beno chance of his body ever coming up, if there was any resurrection!
They placed his body in the grave, and placed the granite slab uponit. But a bird passing over, dropped a seed, just an acorn fell there,
before they placed the granite slab. The oak tree in time split thatgranite slab !
That is all. We can make the application. The life 

204
PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

principle is mightier than any other force. It is there in the grain of 
mustard seed. Our Lord took it as an illustration of a certain subject ;
a life principle, capable of growth, and therefore exercising force, 
producing the most unexpected results. 

Then He said, “ 
But who is there of you,” and He gave them this 
picture of labourers, as perhaps we should call them, ploughmen, or 
shepherds keeping sheep, rendering their service. It is an Eastern 
picture in its terminology. The word used for servant is dozllos,
slave. 
Slaves are doing their work in the fields, and at the close of the day 
they still have duty to perform, as they come in from their ploughing, 
or watching over the flocks. Jesus said, What happens 7
Does the 
owner of the fields, flocks, ploughs, and slaves, invite these men to sit 
down and have their evening meal ? Does he not rather tell them to 
carry on and do their evening work, and prepare his meal ;
and when 
he has eaten, they can take their places at the board ?
Such the simple 
picture as He drew it, so well understood by those standing around 
Him. He asked them this question, Do you say, Thank you ?
Are 
we halted as we read that ? Are we inclined to say, Of course we say, 
Thank you ?
We do, and very often too, but we never need do so. 
There is nothing in inherent justice that demands that we should thank 
anyone for service, which is merely the rendering of an obligation, and 
the doing of a duty. We do say, Thank you ;
but there is no inherent 
necessity. At this point Jesus was using the figure that slaves do not 
sit down first to eat, but only when they have done their duty. The 
master does not thank them for what they have done. There is no 
need that he should. If we want to be thanked for doing our duty, 
that shows our hearts were not in the duty. 

How curious to bring those illustrations together, and yet how 
close together they are. What is the teaching ?
Take the first illustration 
of the grain of mustard seed. Men facing the demands of Jesus, 
feeling how tremendous they are, intelligently feeling it, conscious of 
their own weakness, in all sincerity said to Jesus, Increase our faith. 
The plea is not over. People are still praying for an increase of faith.
It reveals a false thinking on a true line, an outlook that is conscious 
of weakness, and has grasped the value of faith, and asks for an increase. 
Our Lord said, You do not need more faith, but faith of a different 
kind and nature. It is not a question of quantity, but one of quality.

Then what is faith ?
Faith is that which has in it a principle of 
life. We may define a living faith by saying three things about it. 
Living faith is, first, conviction concerning the fact of God. It is, 
secondly, the experience of relationship with God. Thirdly and consequently, 
living faith is absolute submission to the will of God. Faith 
in God is far more than conviction that He exists. Thousands of people 
believe in the existence of God, but they have no living faith, no faith 
like a grain of mustard seed, with the principle of life and force at its 
very heart. There must be conviction of God, but there must also be 

THE UNPROFITABLE SERVANTS 

relationship with Him, the going out of the soul towards Him in faith. 

That means-and here is the point of supreme emphasis-submission 

to Him. Jesus said to those men, If you have faith as a grain of 

mustard seed, you would say to that sycamine tree, Be rooted up, and 

be planted in the sea, and it should be done. There is no doubt that 

where He said this, there was a sycamine tree growing, and He pointed 

it out. There was another occasion when He used, not the sycamine 

tree, but something far bigger and bulkier-a mountain. It is the same 

thing, whether the tree planted in the soil near to them, or the mountain 

towering its head above Galilee. He said if we had faith as a grain of 

mustard seed, we would say to the tree, Be rooted up and planted in 

the sea ;
or we would say to a mountain, Be removed and be buried in 

the sea. 

We ask, But is that so ? Yes, if we have faith with the life principle 

in it. I am emphasizing a truth that is fundamental ;
first, conviction 

of God ;
secondly, relationship with God ;
and then obedience to God. 

We cannot exercise faith in God in doing anything that we do not know 

to be the will of God. We shall never say to a sycamine tree, Be rooted 

up and be planted in the sea, unless we know God wants that sycamine 

tree rooted up and planted there. We shall never say to a mountain, 

Be removed, and go into the sea, except we know it is God’s will that 

that mountain should be removed and cast into the sea. 

That is where we break down in faith, and that is why we are still 

asking for an increase of faith, thinking if we had more, we should be 

better able to meet its demands. But no, it is a life principle, and that 

is belief in God, having relationship with Him, being submitted to 

Him. 

Let us test our praying by that. We say, We have prayed, and we 
have believed in God, and we have relationship with Him ;
and we 
wanted this great mountain, barring our way, removed. We want it 
moved, but we do not seem to have faith. Does God want it moved ?
Is it His will that the sycamine tree should be rooted up from the 
place where it is growing and flourishing, and perish in the waters of 
the sea ? That is the supreme question. These men wanted more 
faith. He said, If ye had faith like that grain of mustard seed, with 
its life principle, that principle is always that of seeking and acting 
wholly and only within the will of God. 

Then going on, without any break, our Lord said, “
But who is 
there of you.” One is halted for a moment to ask what He meant by 
this. There can be only one answer. We want more faith, so said the 
apostles, and so we would say. Why do we want more faith ?
We want 
a faith that will enable us to do these impossible things. Supposing 
we get it ;
what effect is that going to have on our own charactersand natures and lives ?
There was an occasion when these men were 
sent out, and they came back with great rejoicing, because of the 
victories they had seen. Coming back rejoicing, they had said to Jesus, 

206
PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

‘ 
Even the demons are subject unto us.” He said to them, Do not 

rejoice in that. Do not be proud of that. Rejoice not that the demons 

are subject unto you. Rejoice rather that you are the burgesses of 

heaven from where Satan has already fallen. 

Do we see the subtle peril that is revealed here ? Any increase of 

faith producing the ability we think, to do great things, creates a peril 

for the soul, that of satisfaction in service, and the expectation that 

the service shall be recognized with reward. We sing, 

“
We will ask for no reward, 

Except to serve Thee still.” 

Do we mean it ?
Yet here is a wonderful thing. Take that little parable, and then 
turn back a page or two in Luke, and with this parable of Jesus in 
mind, listen to Him. He was talking to servants who were faithful, 
and He said, “
Blessed are those servants whom the Lord when He 
cometh
shall find watching ;
verily I say unto you, that He shall gird 
Himself, and make them sit down to meat, and shall come and serve 
them.” That is the very thing He had told them they had no right 
to expect, but He had already told them He would do. On the earthly 
level the lord of the slaves first secures his own meal and sustenance, 
and does not thank them because they are only doing their duty. Jesus 
said, That is your position so far as you are concerned. Yet He had 
already told them He would do that very thing ;
that at the last He 
would make them to sit down to meat, and come and serve them. 

We should remember that action is completely of grace. We have 
no claim upon Him that is legal. We have no right of expectation onthe basis of service for anything in the nature of reward. Yes, He will 
make us to sit down, He will gird Himself, and He will serve us ;
but 
even then, in the habitations of the blessed that lie beyond, when we 
enter into all that to which our loving hearts are looking forward, we 
shall never be allowed to forget that everything we receive is of His 
grace, our Lord and our Master. We are His servants. We ought to 
be and must be faithful ;
but do not let us look on and say, Now we 
have done very well ; we are going to have a reward for this, and we 
are taking it. We have no right to expect it. We shall have it, but 
by His grace. 

42.
The Unrighteous Judge 
Luke xviii :
I-8
I
I
T IS an interesting fact, perhaps of no great value or importance, 
that this parable and the next, that of the Pharisee and the publican, 
are the only two recorded parables of our Lord in which the reason 

THE UNRIGHTEOUS JUDGE 

for giving them is first stated, before the parable was spoken. “
He 
spake a parable unto them to the end that they ought always to pray,
and not to faint.” Again at the ninth verse, “
He spake also thisparable unto certain which trusted in themselves that they wererighteous, and set all others at naught.” Those are the statements of 
the reasons for these parables.

Both parables had to do with prayer. The first is a revelation of 
the attitude of God towards human prayer. The second, that of the 
Pharisee and publican, is a revelation of the attitude of man in prayer.
Taking our usual method in these studies, we consider first the subjectillustrated ;
secondly, the figure which our Lord employed, deducingfrom that twofold consideration the essential teaching of the parablethen, and for all time.

What was the subject illustrated ?
“
He spake a parable unto themthat they ought always to pray and not to faint.” Notice the slightalteration, which is an important one, from the Old Version, whichread, “
He spake a parable unto them to this end, that men oughtalways to pray, and not to faint.” We now read, “
He spake a parableunto them, that they ought always to pray.” Apparently a slightdifference, but it was not a general statement for humanity atlarge, but a particular application for His own people. He wastalking to His disciples. A little more of the context therefore isimportant.

What had He been saying just before ? The record is in the end of the 
seventeenth chapter. At the twenty-second verse we read, “
And He said 
unto His disciples, The days will come, when ye shall desire to see oneof the days of the Son of man, and ye shall not see it. And theyshah
say to you, Lo, there !
Lo, here ! go not away, nor follow after them;
for as the lightning, when it lighteneth out of the one part of heaven,
shineth unto the other part under heaven ;
so
shall the Son of man 
be in His day.” He described to them the conditions which would 
obtain ;
as in the time of Noah, men went on with the usual habits oflife, they ate and drank, and married ;
as in the time of Sodom, in 
the days of Lot, they ate and drank, bought and sold, planted andbuilt. The ordinary life in the times of Noah and Lot, godless lives.
Suddenly the Divine interference ;
so
shall it be in the days of theSon of man. He had been giving His disciples instructions on that 
great subject, and had told them in that day, of two men in one bed,
one would be taken and the other left. The one taken is for judgment.
The one left is the one not judged. He ended by saying to them,
“
Where the body is, thither will the eagles also be gathered together.
And He spake a parable unto them to the end that they ought alwaysto pray, and not to faint.” That is the setting. There are no time 
notes. It is not certain that what our Lord said in this parable wasspoken immediately at the time of the teaching in the previous chapter,
but Luke does record these parables closely upon His teaching con
308
PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

cerning
that consummation of judgment ;
when the Son of man comes 

in that way. Evidently underlying is the consciousness, because of

the conditions obtaining, and continuing to obtain, so that even in the

hour of coming judgment, life will be as it has been, eating and drink
ing, marrying and giving in marriage, buying and selling, the whole

godless activity going on ;
because of that, life for His people must 

always be strenuous and severe.

If as Christians we are having an easy time, and enjoying life, we

are poor Christians. The Christian life has always been lived in the

presence of gigantic forces opposed to it, and to Christ, and to God.

Life goes on, and so it will. To go back and use the word of the ancient

prophet, God is governing. He will “
overturn, overturn, overturn, 

until He shall come Whose right it is ”
;
and in that interval there can 

be nothing but severe and strenuous life, Because of that, His disciples

ought always to pray and not to faint. That is the subject illustrated

by this parable.

Granted the severity and strain of life in the midst of unparalleled

and rampant godlessness, how are we to go on ?
How shall we carry

on ? We ought always to pray and not to faint. In the use of those 

two expressions our Lord sharply but clearly defined two possibilities

for life under such conditions ;
prayer is one, fainting is the 

other. 

Look at them a little more particularly. To take these two ideas 
and put them thus, if we pray we do not faint ;
if we faint, it is becausewe do not pray. The two ideas are mutually exclusive, and in themidst of such conditions we shall either faint or pray. Then we getthe force of His command. We ought to pray, and not to faint. Toput it in the other way, for the sake of emphasis, we ought not tofaint. How can we help fainting ?
We ought to pray. That is a greatword, “
they oqght.”
“
He spake this parable to the end that men 
ought. *
When we read “
ought ”
we mean something we owe, we arein debt ;
something that is due, and we can pay it. These disciples ofHis in the midst of these conditions, which will continue until He 
comes, they owe it to God, and to the world, they owe it to themselvesnever to break down, never to faint, always to pray.

We might stay there and say a good deal about it ;
but see how 
our Lord emphasized the teaching, by the use of this parable. Look 
therefore at the figure in all simplicity, quite apart from the teaching.
What is the picture our Lord drew ? “ 
There was in a city a judge,”
Probably here we have again some actual happening, perhaps manysuch. Do not forget the time in which our Lord uttered it. Then all 
that region was largely under the jurisdiction of Herod.
That meant it 
was a reign of injustice and wrong, terror and oppression ;
and undoubtedly 
this is the picture of one of the inferior judges underHerod
jurisdiction, one supposed to preside over a court before whom disputes 
should come, and he was to judge. The word here of the woman, 

THE UNRIGHTEOUS JUDGE 

“ 
avenge me,” is an unfortunate translation. What she said to the 

judge was, Do justice for me ;
avenge, in that sense. She was

not asking for wrath to be poured out, but for justice. She was

appealing for justice to a judge who was supposed to be there to

administer it. 

Our Lord gave us the character of this man in these words, he 

“ 
feared not God, nor regarded man.” Attempting to interpret the

thought, he was a man submitted to no high sanctions. He was not 

religious, and he was not humanitarian. Again, to put that in another

way, he flaunted both the tables of the ten commandments, the first

that revealed relationship with God, and the second that revealed

relationship with our fellow-beings. He did not care for one or the 

other. To state it in the terms Jesus employed when asked which was

the great commandment ;
here was a man who cared neither for God,

nor his neighbour. He did not love, fear, or care about God. And 

man ?
No, he was not interested in man either. That is the picture

of the judge as Jesus sketched it.

Then there is the picture, again a commonplace one, of a widowseeking justice. We are not told what lay behind this story, or whatthe cause was. She had been wronged somewhere in the matter ofjustice and equity. She had an adversary. The word is a legal one.
She wanted simple justice. Legally she wanted redress. That is thepicture of the woman. She went to the judge. We are told “
she 
came oft unto him.” She came again and again with the same simplerequest for justice. Do me justice in the matter of mine adversary.
She was pleading with the one who dispensed justice, for justice, andfor nothing else.

Look now at the judge. “ 
He would not for a while,” that is, a goodspace, an indefinite period. But she came again, and kept on coming.
Then there came action, in which the judge did what she wanted, didjustice, avenged her of her adversary. Why did he do it ?
What a 
revealing story it is. First of all “ 
he said within himself.” It is 
wonderful how a phrase sometimes circumscribes things, and showstremendous facts. Mark the daring, “
He said within himself, ThoughI fear not God, nor regard man.” He affirmed his position. Christhad said that of him at the beginning. Here he said it himself. Hesaid within himself, he was not going to be compelled to do anything,
because he did not fear God, nor care anything about this woman.
He was not thinking about God, nor of her.

What then was the reason for his action ?
Look at him, “
Because 
this widow troubleth me, I will avenge her, lest she wear me out byher continual coming.” Quite literally, ” 
lest she give me black eyes,” 
“ 
lest she bruise me.” He cared nothing about God nor man. All he 
cared for was just himself. He did not want to be troubled. If thiswoman keeps on coming I shall get bruised. Poor man !
What an 
appalling revelation ;
no fear of God, no fear of man, but fear for 

14
210 PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

himself. He did justice because of a woman’s importunity, and hisfear that if she kept this up, he would suffer still further personalinconvenience. 

What was our Lord intending to teach these listening disciples bythat picture ?
The common answer to that question is that our Lordintended to teach the importance of being importunate in prayer. He 
intended to teach exactly the opposite. That may be challenged bythose who quote and love the idea of knocking and knocking, and 
asking and asking, and praying, That may have its value, but that isnot what our Lord was teaching here, but exactly the opposite. The 
whole teaching of the parable is intended to be one of contrast betweenthe judge and God, and therefore contrast between the actions of thejudge and the actions of God.

Everyone agrees that the contrast is suggested between the judgeand God. They are not so sure of the contrast between the actions ofthe judge and the actions of God. AI1
the judge was, God is not. All 
that God is, the judge was not. The judge had no sense of high sanctions. 
Life is always on a low level when self is the inspiration. Self 
is always animal and beastly when lived alone. No, he had no carefor God ;
no care for man. He had no sense of God, and made noresponse to high sanctions. With profound reverence, God is exactlythe opposite. God is bound by these very sanctions. 

“
God nothing does nor suffers to be done, 
But you yourself would do,
Could you but see the end of all
events 
As well as He.” 

He is bound by the very sanctions this man ignored, by Himself andby man and man’s necessity. He is bound by the sanctions of Hisown Being. There are things He cannot do because they would denythe truth concerning Himself, His righteousness, His holiness, Hisjustice, His compassion ;
and God cannot be unrighteous, God cannotbe other than holy. God cannot be unjust, and God cannot fail in 
mercy. He is bound by the sanctions of what He is in Himself. We 
see the contrast between that judge and Himself.

He is bound by the sanctions of human necessity. That needs no 
argument. 
“
He hath loved me, He hath loved me, 
I cannot tell why,” 

says the old hymn. I know why !
He could not do any other, and bethe God He is ;
and in all human history, His law, and everythingelse has been conditioned by His bending and bowing over humanity,
and seeking to serve it. He cares for man, and He is bound by thesanctions of human necessity and human interest.

But now mark the difference. There is just as great a contrast, 

THE UNRIGHTEOUS JUDGE 21X
necessarily, between the actions of the judge and God as between the 

character of the judge and God. Mark the judge ;
indifferent delay 

for a while ;
but when he acted, his action was in order to escape 

personal suffering and annoyance. Now look at God, and mark the 

declaration that the Lord made here about Him. God shall do justice 

to His own elect, which cry to Him day and night. That does not mean 

a perpetual wailing on the part of man, but it means the continuity of 

necessity through the ages. He is long-suffering over them, and He 

will avenge them speedily. The judge delayed, was indifferent, and 

did not give at all until he was forced by the necessity created by his 

own desire not to be worried. If we go to God, He will act, and act 

speedily, Behind that we have a revelation of God. That revelation 

is made in Old and New Testaments, and specially in Christ Himself ;
that God’s action is at cost to Himself to secure justice for those who 

need it. The man’s action was to escape annoyance. God’s action 

is motivated by His willingness to suffer all things for humanity, for 

“ 
God was in Christ, reconciling.” 

So Christ is saying, We ought always to pray, and when we pray, 

there is no need for us to keep on as though God were unwilling to 

listen. He is always listening. We have no need to keep on as though 

God were reluctant. He is never reluctant. There is no need for us 

to persuade Him. 

‘Finally, lay the emphasis on the word “ 
always,” “ 
always to pray.” 
Not words necessarily, not words at all ;
but an attitude of life, 
“ 
always to pray.” The life characterized and mastered by the forward, 
onward looking. That is the meaning of this word “ 
pray.” The 
forward wish, the life that is content with the will of God, and discontented 
with everything that contradicts that will, that is praying. 
We ought always to pray. If we live and pray so, there will be no 
fainting. The Lord fainteth not, neither is weary ;
and those who put 
their trust in Him are borne up above all the turmoil and the strife, 
and they do not faint. 

Notice how He finished. “
Howbeit when the Son of man cometh, 
shall He find faith on the earth ?
”
That last sentence swung back to 
all He had been telling the disciples at the end of the previous chapter. 
It is the return to the subject of the coming of the Son of man. He 
had told them when He comes, things will be going on as they had 
been, that He would break in on all the godlessness, when He comes 
in judgment. Now He reverted to it. “
Howbeit when the Son of man 
cometh, shall He find faith on the earth ?
”
It does not mean that 
He will not find faith, but He will not find the faith established, 
victorious. That is in harmony with the teaching that this age is not 
to be consummated with a perfect victory of faith upon all the earth ;
but it will be broken in upon by the advent of the Son of man ;
and 
until then, men ought always to pray, and not to faint ;
and they can 
do that because God is what He is. 

212 PARARLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

43. The Pharisee and the Publican
Luke xviii :
g-14 

HIS is one of the best known and best loved parables of Jesus. ItTis interesting to observe that those parables of our blessed Lordwhich have taken hold more profoundly generally upon the heart ofman, are found in this Gospel of Luke, the chronicler of God’s second 
Man, and the last Adam. He, a Greek writer, portrays Him in all theperfection of His human nature. That may account for this appealof some of his parables to the human heart.

An honest consideration of this story shows that it is indeed theword of the Lord, quick and sharp, dividing asunder. It is a verysearching, as well as comforting story. Like the previous parable, itis concerned with the subject of prayer. In that we had a revelation 
of God in the matter of prayer, as He was contrasted in His characterand in His dealings, with the unrighteous judge. In this parablewe have a revelation of human nature in the attitudes, or activities 
of prayer, in the presence of God.

We consider first, the subject illustrated ;
then the figure which our 
Lord employed ;
finally deducing the teaching.

The subject illustrated is revealed in the specific statement withwhich the parable opens, “
And He spake also this parable unto certainwhich trusted in themselves that they were righteous, and set all othersat nought.” We at once see why the parable was uttered. It wasspoken to a certain personal and relative attitude. The personalattitude is revealed in the word, they “
trusted in themselves that 
they were righteous.” That phrase illuminates the whole situationof the Pharisees, and those closely associated with them. They believedin righteousness, but their idea of righteousness was on a low level.
In the great Manifesto Jesus had said, “
Except your righteousnessshall exceed the righteousness of the scribes and Pharisees, ye shallin no wise enter into the Kingdom of heaven.” I do not know that 
many of them could have said what Paul did in his marvellous autobiographical 
passage in the Philippian letter. After thirty years ofcomradeship with Christ, he said, as he looked back at those days,
that he was ‘
a Hebrew of Hebrews ;
as
touching the law, a Pharisee;
as
touching zeal, persecuting the Church ;
as touching the righteousness 
which is in the law, found blameless.” Perhaps of this man whomwe see in the parable, that also could be said. We do not know, butwe do know his righteousness consisted in his devotion to certain laws,
and interpretations of the laws ;
especially in those days to the traditions 
with which the laws had been almost submerged, as to their vitalapplicability. Our Lord had those people’s personal attitude in mind 

THE PHARISEE AND THE PUBLICAN
when He spoke this parable. They were trusting in themselves that 
they were righteous.

Then the relative attitude of these men is revealed in that pregnantphrase, “ 
And set all others at nought.” The Greek word there mightbe rendered a little more forcefully, as in the margin, “ 
the rest.” What 
a way to dismiss all except oneself !
They trusted in
themselves, thesepeople, whom Jesus had in mind, that they were righteous ;
and 
accounted all the rest as not counting, as mere ciphers. That attitude 
is seen again and again in the Gospels. Once some of these men 
addressed the crowd, and spoke of them as cursed, those who did notknow the law. Here is an attitude of life, personally trusting in oneself,
believing one is righteous, and at the same time, setting all the restat nought.

Luke says specifically in the ninth verse that it was these attitudesour Lord had in mind. These personal and relative attitudes are seenin the light of God. Two men were in the Temple, and men were looking 
at them. The crowds would see them, and form their own opinionconcerning them. Jesus stood quietly there, and said in effect, Lookat those two men. Look at that one man, his attitude concerninghimself, and towards all the rest ;
and see what God thinks about 
them both, the Pharisee and one of the despised.

Now look at the figure employed. Here we are in the presence offamiliar things. Jesus drew a picture of two men in the temple. “
Two 
men went up into the Temple to pray.” They both went to the temple,
and they both went to pray. At that point this story becomes searching.
Isaiah had referred to the Temple, and had called it “
My holy mountain,” 
“
My house of prayer ”
;
and in the course of His ministry Jesusreferred to it by practically citing Isaiah’s words, “
It is written, And 
My house shall be called a house of prayer.” So two men are here,
seen going to the right place, the place appointed, the house of prayer,
with all that that word meant. Look at the two men, and see thesimilarity between them. Both of them were going to the Temple,
recognizing it as the house of God, the place set apart and ordainedas the place of worship, and
going there to pray.

Then we begin to see the difference. What is the first thing aboutthe Pharisee ?
He “ 
prayed thus with himself.” Oh yes, he began byaddressing God. He used the Name at the beginning of his prayer.
“ 
The Pharisee stood and prayed thus with himself.” That is the 
emphasis. God he knew. It was the house of prayer, and he knew itas the place where men come to deal with God, and he began hisprayer with a recognition of God.

Luke tells us, moreover, that he “ 
stood and prayed.” A little 
lower down
we read, “ 
The publican, standing afar off.” They wereboth standing, but the descriptive words are different. The word used 
by Luke of the Pharisee suggests in itself a static and upright positionof perfect security and self-satisfaction. The word stulic
as descriptive 

2x4
PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

of his attitude is warranted by the word itself, he “ 
stood.” The other 

man stood, for it was the habit to stand in prayer. But how differently

men can stand !
A man can stand with the braggadocio of an uplifted

chin that tells a great story about him. He can stand with head not 

lifted, but bowed down, which telIs
an equally great story. Even in 

those two different words translated by the same verb in ourIanguage,
we have the dawning of a great revelation.

This man prayed with himself. What does that mean ?
Was he 

alone ?
Hardly at that time of worship and prayer ;
and yet he was.

He prayed, separated from these others. He knew enough of this man

and his habits to know that he would withdraw, perhaps getting as

near to the sacred altar as he could, and seek to be separated even in

the matter of physical contact of his garments from the rabble, all the

rest. He “ 
prayed with himself.” But something he did not seem to

have recognized was that when he prayed with himself, he was not

only separated from the others, he was separated from God ;
and 

therefore his prayer rose no higher than the beautiful roof of the

Temple, perhaps not so high as that I
He was in a circle. He was 

the centre of the circle, and its circumference. He prayed with

himself. 

Then he recognized the Deity, approaching Him by using the name,
God. His conception of God is revealed in his prayer, “
God, I thankThee, that I am not as the rest of men.” I am no extortioner. I am 
not unjust. I am not an adulterer. I am not “ 
even as this publican.”
In that prayer can be read all the scorn there was in his heart for 
men. He was telling God that he had abstained from vulgarsins. 

Had he finished ?
Oh no, he had not. “ 
I fast twice in the week.” 
That was a work of supererogation. The law did not require that, buthe had followed the traditions most meticulously in the interpretationof the law. “
I give tithes of all that I get !
”
All that I get, andacquire, I set aside the tenth of everything obtained in the course ofmy business. This man was talking to God. He began by addressingHim, and he told God that he had abstained from certain vulgarforms of sin, and that he was very careful to observe certain rites orceremonies. 

Why was he telling God these things ? Evidently this was hisconception of God. He would not have written down what was in his 
subliminal consciousness. This man thought of God as One satisfiedwith trivialities, abstaining from vulgar sins, and the observing ofcertain rites and ceremonies, We may go further and say he thoughtGod was obligated to him, because of these things. He went up topray, but he prayed within himself. Into the circle of his own selfcentred 
personaIity he dragged God by name, and degraded Him bywhat he said. 

Look at that other man. Jesus told the story of the publican
to 

THE PHARISEE AND THE PUBLICAN
fling up into clear and sharp relief the picture of the Pharisee. He 
spoke this parable to those who trusted in their own righteousness,
as this Pharisee did, despising others, He might have left it there,
but no. He drew attention to another man, this publican, standingafar off, suggesting a different attitude. The Pharisee was in all probability 
pressing as near as he could to the altar. This man perhaps wasjust within the Temple, the holy place. He had crept in, and stoodafar off from the place which was central to the conception of theDivine Being. He did ” 
not lift up so much as his eyes unto heaven.”
With downcast eyes, beating on his breast, the action of confession, thenhe spoke. “
God “-that is the same word the other man had used ;
but the nominative case was not in his prayer. The other man’s prayerwasfullofit,“I .. .
I .
.. I .
.. I .
.. I!” Itwastheobjectivecase here. It is “
me ”
;
“ 
God be merciful to me a sinner.” Seven 
words only. See what he has done. He has drawn a circle, and thereare two personalities within it. Who are they ? God and himself ;
‘ 
God,” ” 
me.” That circle that looks so narrow, yet has within itthat one sinning man and all the vastness of eternity, for his cry is areal one. One remembers the words of the ancient prophet, in whichinterpreting the fact of God, God speaks to him and says, “
The highand lofty One that inhabiteth eternity, Whose name is Holy ;
I dwell 
in the high and holy place, with him also that is of a contrite andhumble spirit. To this man will I look, even to him that is poorand of a contrite spirit, and that trembleth at My word.” His 
conception of God is thus revealed. “
God be merciful to me, a 
sinner.” 

What was his conception of God ?
That He was holy, One in Whosepresence a sinner needs propitiation, for that is his word, Be propitious 
to me. His sense of God in his prayer was that God is compassionate,
One to Whom a sinner could come. 

Two conceptions of God. The same name, God ;
even as we maysay God, and mean very different things ;
even as we may say Jesus,
and have very opposing conceptions. The God of the Pharisee is One 
satisfied with trivialities, and has in some senses a duty to a manbecause he has abstained from vulgarity, and has kept up certain ritesand forms and ceremonies. The other conception of God is of OneWho is holy, in Whose presence a sinning man needs mercy ;
but One 
to Whom he can come, and with downcast eyes, and beating on hisbreast, breathe out the sighing of his soul for mercy. That is thepicture, and what a picture it is.

The teaching again is self-evident and declared. When Jesus had 
finished His parable, He had not quite ended. He had something else 
to say. He had to utter a judgment, to make an appraisement, to passa verdict. “ 
I say unto you.” Take that phrase in the records, andwatch when it fell from the lips of Jesus. He used it now. It was the 
formula of authority. It was the voice of the watching God. Yes, God 

216 PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

had been watching and listening to Pharisee and publican, and Jesusnow told us the result. He said, “
This man went down to his house 
justified rather than the other.” That is the appraisement, that is the 
judgment, that is the verdict concerning this publican. It is interestingto see some expositors are a little at pains to tell us that Jesus did notmean there what we now mean by being justified. I admit the men 
of the time did not understand it in all its fulness
;
but He knew its 
meaning. It means exactly what it does in the New Testament.
“
Being therefore justified by faith, we have peace with God throughour Lord Jesus Christ ;
through Whom also we have had our accessby faith into this grace wherein we stand.” Only a word, but it is theword of Jesus, with all its meaning ;
this man went down to his house 
justified. I think this man came to the Temple again the next day,
but he did not come in the same way. He came the first time sin-
burdened, knowing his need in the presence of the holy God of mercy.
When he went away the prayer was heard ;
and somewhere, in his 
house perhaps, confidence possessed him, and I can imagine him comingup the next day, still taking the same attitude, still standing in the 
same way. There was no strutting or braggadocio, but the next dayhe lifted up his eyes to heaven. This day he could not ;
but when he 
came back he knew that he could lift them up. There was no beatingupon the breast any more, but perhaps a great, soberHallelujah-
justified!
What about this other man, the Pharisee ?
There was nothingfurther to be said about him. He was dismissed. The publican
went 
down to his house justified rather than the other. That is all we know 
about him. Undoubtedly the Pharisee was there again the next day,
but he was left “ 
with himself.” 

Our Lord gathered up the whole force of the wonderful parable inHis last word, “
I say unto you .
.
.
every one that exalteth himselfshall be humbIed
;
but he that humbleth 
himself shall be exalted.” 
Where are we when we come into the house of God, and pray ?
I 
cannot tell you. You know !
44. The Pounds 
Luke xix :
11-28 

HE OPENING verse of the paragraph marks the occasion uponTwhich this parable was uttered. “
And as they heard thesethings, He added and spake a parable, because He was nigh to Jerusalem, 
and they supposed that the Kingdom of God was immediatelyto appear.” That introduces us not only to the occasion of the parable,
but also to the intention of our Lord in its utterance. 

THE POUNDS 

Luke said, “ 
As they heard these things.” What things ?
Luke 

was continuing his narrative. Jesus and His disciples were in Jericho,

and they had heard what had happened in connection withZacchzeus,
that Jesus had invited Himself to his house. They had seen Him go

in, and had waited while He was inside in that private interview. How 

long it lasted no one can tell. They had seen ‘Zacchaus come forth 

from that guest chamber with Jesus, and had heard Zacchaus declare 

the result of the interview as he said he gave to the poor, and restored

fourfold what he had exacted wrongfully. Then they had heard Jesus 

say, “
To-day is salvation come to this house .
.. For the Son of man 

came to seek and to save that which was lost.” They heard these

things, and He went on, and added something, spoke another parable.

Those are the things referred to, especially the last sentence, “
The 

Son of man came to seek and to save that which was lost.” 

Luke tells us the reason for this parable. He was nigh to Jerusalem.
We are in the last period of the ministry of our Lord. “
His face was 
steadfastly set to go to Jerusalem.” He was travelling nearer to thecity of the great King, as He Himself called it, coming near to thecentre of the national life, and to all the things that were to happento Him, about which He had been talking repeatedly to His disciplessince Caesarea
Philippi. Evidently there was a strong feeling amongHis disciples that something was going to happen because He wasnigh to Jerusalem, and they expected the Kingdom of God immediatelyto appear, so He spake this parable.

What then was the subject He intended to illustrate ?
The complete 
eleventh verse gives us the reason of its uttering. “
He was nighunto Jerusalem,” and the time of year was near to Passover. There 
were larger crowds then in Jerusalem than at any other time.Josephus
tells us that two million people more than the average and ordinarypopulation came to the city. Jesus was coming up to the city, and theysupposed that the Kingdom of God was immediately to appear. It is 
open to question whether the “
they ”
referred to the disciples or tothe multitudes. I think it may refer to both. These were the closingdays in the life of our Lord, and there was a spirit of expectationeverywhere. There were multitudes that were friendly, and many thatwere hostile. Yet there was this feeIing
that a crisis was approaching.
Jesus had been up and down in their land, in Judaa, and in Galilee;
and now for a Iong period, nearly six months in Perzea,
going hereand there, He had been preaching the Kingdom of God ;
and everyonefelt the time was ripe for something to happen. What did they suppose 
?
What did they think ? Luke says they “ 
supposed.” Take 
that word and express it by another phrase. It seemed to them,
observing the signs of the times, having watched His ministry, andlistened to Him, noticing that He would appear in the midst of themultitudes ;
and by these gathered multitudes it seemed to themthat
the Kingdom of God was immediately to appear. 

218 PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

How should we understand that ? The word for “
appear ”
there 
is a strong one. It means coming into clear, outward, open manifestation, 
and there is no doubt that in the thinking of the multitudes, andof His disciples too, when they thought, or supposed that the Kingdomof God was about to appear, they imagined that in this visit to Jerusalem 
He would do something to assert His authority, take the reinsof government into His own hands, fulfil
the common expectation ofthe Jewish nation about Messiah and the Kingdom of God. To them 
the coming of the Kingdom would be the breaking of the yoke of Rome,
the setting of the nation free from oppression, and the bringing intooutward and manifest form that which Jesus had been preaching fromthe beginning of His ministry, the Kingdom of God. They supposedthe Kingdom of God, as they interpreted it, and as they desired it,
was at the doors, that the moment had come. The “
they ”
of verse 
eleven surely referred to the discipIes
and the multitudes. I am quitesure reference was to the disciples, because even after His resurrectionthey still had that view, when they came to Him and asked Him,
“
Dost Thou at this time restore the Kingdom of Israel ? ”
Theirs was 
a material outlook, and their expectation was of the immediate manifestation 
of the Kingdom of God in power. They did not understandthe nature of the Kingdom of God, He had preached and declared it,
and had affirmed its reality. He had announced its nearness, enunciatedits ethic ;
and they were still waiting for something material. AsGeorge Macdonald
put it,

 
They all were looking for a King,
To slay their foes, and lift them high.
He came a little baby thing,
That made a woman cry.” 

Even now the same thing is apparent. They were mistaken in theirideals. They felt He was there for the purpose of setting up thatKingdom. Because of that, Luke declares clearly that He utteredthe parable of the pounds.

What was the figure He used. In the course of our studies we have 
seen a wonderful variety of methods of illustration. He took thingsnear at hand, and persons too, historic incidents. Here is the figureof a man going away to receive a kingdom, and leaving his interests inthe charge of his bond-slaves ;
a man who, when he had started outon his journey to receive the kingdom, was followed by a deputationof his citizens, declaring that they would not have him as king. That 
idea was familiar then in their current life. Archelaus, Herod
the 
Great, and Antipas, each in turn had gone to Rome to receive a kingdom. 
They were tetrarchs. Everyone wanted the title of king, andhad to go to Rome to get permission for it. Herod
went, and he gainedthat title. It was an empty title, but he gained it. 

But the immediate historic background was not Herod,
but 

THE POUNDS 
Archelaus, whose palace was at Jericho. He had gone to Rome, leaving

his palace, and the interests of his tetrarchy, or his kingdom as he

wished it to be called, to his bond-slaves. He left Philippus in charge,

with money to trade for the maintenance of revenue while he was away.

While away, a deputation of fifty Jews was sent after him, to make

a protest against his becoming king. When they arrived in Rome they

were received by a company of eight thousand Jews, and they made

their protest, and were so successful that Archelaus never received

that title ;
and afterwards he was deposed from the tetrarchy, and

he did not go back there.

Our Lord therefore took a common incident, and used it, of someone 
going away to receive a kingdom, and that coming of his citizenssaying they would not have him. Of course this does not mean that 
Jesus went away to receive a Kingdom, and did not gain it. When 
Archelaus came back, he called for an account undoubtedly, and ourLord enlarged upon that, But that is the figure behind the parable.
Taking this incident, our Lord applied it in a remarkable way toHimself to show that what they were expecting, would not then takeplace. He was then going to Jerusalem, and they thought He was goingto establish a Kingdom according to their ideas. He wanted them to 
see it would not be. He was going away to receive a Kingdom, andHe was leaving responsibility with His servants for the period of Hisabsence. That was the place of the parable and the figure employed;
and that was the purpose for which He uttered the parable. It was to 
teach them that they were wrong in expecting the Kingdom of Godimmediately to appear.

What are we to learn from this parable ? Some people are expectingthe Kingdom of God immediately to appear. I am not entering intoany argument as to when He will return. I only declare, we do notknow when, and there is no sign of proof that His return is near ;
at 
least there is no sign that has not been granted through all the ages.
We want to be ready if He comes ;
and to say, “
Even so, come LordJesus,” and
to be led into the patient waiting for Christ, not theimpatient waiting, which characterizes so many people. Whereverthat impatience is manifested, it is due to a wrong conception of whatthe setting up of that Kingdom will be.

What then did that parable teach those men, and what is itintended to teach us ?
Three things :
the fact of postponement ;
a 
period of waiting, and how it should be occupied ;
and finally,
the certain fact of His return, and a revelation then of His action,
on His return. 

Postponement of His Kingship ? Certainly not, but of its manifestation 
in full power and authority and ultimate victory. That iswhat was and is postponed, and it is still postponed. The life of our 
Lord did not begin when He was born a Baby. It stretches out to the 
past eternity, and on through all the infinite ages. Therefore it is 

220
PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

difficult to speak of the life of our Lord in the terms of ourcalendars
and almanacs. He is not going to be crowned. He is crowned. That 
coronation took place when He ascended on high, after His resurrection. 
He emptied Himself and became obedient to death, even thedeath of the Cross ;
‘
wherefore God highly exalted Him, and gaveHim the name which is above every name ;
that in the name of Jesus 
every knee should bow .
.
.
and that every tongue should confess

that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.” In that 
magnificent passage in Corinthians, Paul says, “
He must reign till Hehath put all His enemies under His feet.” The reign is not postponeduntil the hour of ultimate victory. He is reigning now, and the timeof His coronation was at His ascension. 

But He wanted these disciples to see that what they were lookingfor, which they did not understand, was that the visible and outwardvictory was postponed ;
that He was going away to receive a Kingdom.
He received it when He was received up, and God set Him at His ownright hand, upon His holy hill of Zion, His anointed King.

Then there is a period of waiting, between His receiving the Kingdom 
in the high court of heaven, and His coming finally to establishit visibly on earth. Here is the heart and centre of our parable. When 
the king was gone, he gave to his servants ;
ten of them being named.
That is a symbolic reference, and covers the whole ground. He gaveten pounds to ten servants, a pound to each. This parable of thepounds must not be confused with the parable of the talents, recordedby Matthew. The significance of the talents was the varying gifts thatmay be bestowed. Here in this parable it is equal opportunity. Thepound is a deposit, intended to be used in the interest of the passinghour. They were to trade with it. The word used is a beautiful one ;
occupy, in the sense of trading. The business of those left behind was 
that they were to take the common deposit, and use it in the interestof the business of the King. They were responsible to trade with Hispound ;
his servants, and his business. Paul in the Ephesian letterurged those to whom he wrote that they “
redeem the time, becausethe days are evil.” The marginal reading for “
redeeming the time”
is a word that marks the activity of the merchants and the marketplace, “
buying up the opportunity.” This is not the usual word for 
redeeming, or for time. The meaning is the opportunity. Our business 
then, according to Paul, is to buy up the opportunity, to prosecute thecommerce of the Kingdom of God with such diligence as characterizesthe success of the merchant-men in the market places of the world.
That is the idea. 

There is no Christian man or woman without that pound. We maysay we have not ten talents, but that is another matter. The poundis something other than the gift. The pound is a deposit, and is theGospel of the grace of God. We are witnesses to that Gospel. Ourbusiness in this world, whether men arc saying still, We will not have 

THE POUNDS 
this Man to reign over us, is to do business with that deposit ;
so
to 
make use of it that gains other. That is the deposit. That is the 
pound.

Our Lord says there are different ways of exercising it. One is full 
and complete. One man at the reckoning said, “
Thy pound hathmade ten pounds more.” Notice he did not say, I have been verysuccessful and persistent, and managed to make thy pound into ten.
The pound did it itself. But he had simply fulfilled the responsibilityof trading with it, and there were ten.

Another man had not so full, but a partial result-five. Then that 
other man who had the deposit, did not use it, but took care of it,
wrapped it up in a napkin, did not trade with it ;
and the reason he 
gave was that he knew his lord was stern, and that he reaped wherehe did not sow. 

The citizens outside that group of servants were in revolt. “
We 
will not have this man to reign over us.” They still are. These arethe facts. That is what the world is still saying. It is still sayingit in its governments, and especially in those which have in pasthistory acknowledged our Christ, where He has been known and presented, 
and is now dismissed. “
We will not have this Man to reignover us.” 

But He is coming back. About that there is no question. WhenHe comes again He will come as King ;
not to be made King. Then 
the Kingdom of God will appear according to this parable. The first 
activity of His reappearing will be the investigation of what Hisservants have done with His pound. Where there has been full fidelitythere will be fuller responsibility ;
ten cities to be ruled over. Where 
there has been partial success, still increased responsibility ;
five cities. 
But what about this man who refused to trade ? On his own confession 
our Lord said He would judge him out of his own words, and Hequoted them, not to affirm the truth of it, but to show what he thoughthimself. It was an entirely wrong conception of his lord, and basedupon that wrong conception he had hidden His pound and wrappedit in a napkin, and taken care of it. Our Lord asked him why he hadnot put it in the bank, so that He could have had it with interest ;
a 
question saturated with satire. What happened to him ?
Nothing,
except that he lost his pound. It was taken from him, and given to theman most successful. He was deprived of that opportunity. He hadmissed it. He did not buy it up, and now his own action was unavailing.
I do not think it suggests he was cast out himself. He was saved, soas by fire, and there one leaves him.

As to the citizens who had been in open revolt ;
when He establishes 
the Kingdom they must be slain and swept out. There comes 
the hour when Jesus will return and govern the world, and give it itschance. He has great patience, and His long-suffering is due to Hispatience ;
but there is the moment of limitation. 

222 PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

We have all got the pound. What are we doing with it ?
Are 

we trading with it ?
Oh, my masters, the pounds that are wrapped

up in napkins, which if they were used, might increase the glory of the

Kingdom of our Lord.

The twenty-eighth verse is significant in the light of this parable.

He was going up to Jerusalem, and because He was near, they thought

the Kingdom was coming. He told them these things, and thetwenty-
eighth verse said, “
He went on before ”
alone. He was still going.

But He was “ 
going up.” Geographically it was uphill the road that

led from Jericho to Jerusalem ;
but there is more in it than that. 

Presently He would be received up, and He would receive His Kingdom.

And we are left. We have the pound. How are we using it ? 

45. Rock Personality 
John
i :
40-42
IN THE course of our studies of the parables and parabolic illustrations 
of our Lord, we come now to the Gospel according to John.
Apart from the great allegory of the vine, John has recorded no setand formal discourse of Jesus. While we have more of the words of 
Jesus recorded by John than by the other evangelists, they are ratherof the nature of discussions than set discourses. Even in the Paschal 
discourses, He was answering questions which were asked by His 
OWll.
Nevertheless, in the course of these discussions we find some remarkable 
and revealing illustrations. It is arresting also that Johnnever used the word miracle. Where the other evangelists used thatword, John used the word “
signs ”
that indicated the value of the 
miracle. It is equally interesting, though not of particular importance,
that John never used the word earable.
In the Authorized Version it 
is said (x. 6) ” 
This parable spake Jesus unto them.” In the marginthe Revised has changed that to “ 
proverb.” There are two other 
instances (xvi. 2.5
and 29) where the Authorized has rendered the sameword “ 
proverb,” which is correct. The difference between the twowords parable and proverb is slight. The word parable,fiarabola,
commonly used in the other Gospels simply means to set by the sideof, or literally drawn together, the similarity shown by an illustrationplaced by its side. The word rendered “
proverb ”
in the Revised 
Version, $aroimis
means to make something like something else. The 
idea is similar, that of similitude, whether of a picture, a story, or asaying matters nothing.
Had we taken a chronological sequence in the teaching of Jesus,
this study would have been the first, for it is the first recorded occasion 

ROCK PERSONALITY 

of our Lord’s use of a figurative expression. In the first five chaptersof this Gospel we have some account of events that happened in thefirst year of His ministry. Here we are at the very beginning of thatministry.

Taking our usual method, we consider three things. What was it 
our Lord was illustrating when He used this figure of speech :
secondly,
we look at the figure itself, and what it was intended to convey:
attempting then to gather up from such consideration, the teaching 
for all time. 

What was the subject He was illustrating ? His words wereextremely few. He said, “
Thou art Simon, the son of Jonah ;
thou 
shalt be called Cephas,” and John added “
which is by interpretation,
Peter.” The marginal reading is “
rock ”
or “ 
stone.” Again weremind ourselves that our Lord was now facing His public ministry.
The waiting years were over, and He was commencing His work. He 
began, as this first chapter of John shows, by gathering around Himselfa little group of individuals. Five of them are named :
Andrew and 
another, who unquestionably was John, Simon, Philip and Nathanael.
Here was the occasion, and the story proceeds with perfect naturalness.
There was nothing in the nature of our Lord’s work, either here or at 
any time, of organized propaganda. My mind goes back to a sermonI heard preached by my old friend who has now gone Home, Dr. LenBroughton. He took as his text the words, “ 
As He went,” and he 
gathered up in a remarkable way the occasions when that, or a similarphrase, occurred in the story of Jesus. He was doing things “
as He 
went.” I think that was the trouble with John the Baptist when hethought Jesus was doing nothing very definite. That still troublesa good many ,people
who think if things are not being done to plan,
nothing is being done !
Here He proceeded naturahy.
John saw Him 
and pointed Him out to Andrew and the one with him ;
and the two 
went after Him, and spent some hours with Him in private. One of 
the two, Andrew, went and found his brother Simon, and Simon was 
brought to Jesus.

There is no question that of those first five men, Simon, son ofJonah, was supremely a representative human being. Perhaps a statement 
like that needs qualification. All the elements of human nature 
were present in this man’s personality in a remarkable degree. Andrew 
was perhaps a representative man. John was not. He was a mystic,
a dreamer, a poet ; a man looking for things not seen, and seeing them;
listening, for things not heard, and hearing them ;
feeling after theintangible, and touching then. Philip was a quiet and unimpressiveman, always willing to be on the edge of the crowd, and showing othersin ;
but this man Simon was just a human.

When he came to Jesus, He said to him “
Thou shalt be called 
Rock.” What was the value of that ?
What was the subject ourLord was illustrating ?
Without any hesitation I say that He was 

224
PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

illustrating there and then prophetically, for the sake of those listening, 

for Philip and Nathanael, 
for Andrew and John, and Andrew’s brother, 

the possibility of human nature under His Messiahship. Simon had 

come at his brother’s invitation to see the Messiah. After his interview 

with Jesus, Andrew had found his brother Peter, and has hastened to 

find him, to tell him one thing only, that was on Andrew’s heart, the 

thing that obsessed his mind and had already constrained his will ;
“ 
We have found the Messiah.” 

It is a little difficult for us to grasp the meaning of that. We are 

so familiar with the word Christ, which is only the Greek form of 

Messiah, meaning Anointed. We associate it quite properly with our 

Lord. But if we put ourselves back into the place of Andrew and 

Simon, and remember that for hundreds of years the one great hope, 

sometimes flaming and glowing, and sometimes dying into a faint 

ember, was the coming of the Messiah. They were all looking for Him. 

Andrew hurried to find Simon to tell him the amazing thing that he 

had found the Messiah. I think Andrew’s feet were hurried by the 

greatness of the discovery that had come to him. One old Puritan 

expositor has said there is no doubt that Andrew hurried after Simon, 

because Simon had been such a nuisance in the family, and he thought 

it might help him to get him to Jesus early !
I
prefer, however, to 

believe, in spite of the nuisance Simon may have been, Andrew saw 

the dynamic in that brother of his. While the forces were scattered 

there were great possibilities in him. That can be dismissed as 

imagination ;
but there is no doubt this human was an awkward 

customer. 

Jesus knew the conviction that had come to Andrew that He was 
the Messiah in that private interview in the house, and He knew that 
this brother had hastened in obedience to his brother’s invitation, 
to see Him. So He stood in front of him, the Messiah, and to 
that man He said “ 
Thou shalt be rock,” “
Thou shalt be called 
Rock.” 

That brings us to the figure itself, in that one word Rock, a most 
significant word. We have touched upon it in other studies, on otheroccasions. Here we are face to face with the occasion upon which 
our Lord first used it. What is this figure of rock ?
Whereas we use 
the word Kephas,
or petros,
or our word stone, the idea is the same. 
We are looking now merely at the material figure of rock. There is a 
distinction to be found in the sixteenth chapter of Matthew, where two 
words are cIosely
connected, cognate words, petros and petra. Of this 
same man Jesus there said, “
Thou art petros,
and “
on this petra, 
I will build My Church ”
;
the same general idea is here and a different 
signification. When Jesus looked at Peter, He did not say, Thou art 
petra,
hut, Thou art petros. The difference is simply this. Petros is of 
the same nature as ?etra,
but it is a piece of rock. Petra is essential 
rock, the whole fact of rock. When Jesus said He was was going to 

ROCK PERSONALITY 
build His Church, He did not say on a petros, a piece of rock ;
but on 

rock, on petra,
What is petros
?
There may be geologists here and other learned 
men, I have no doubt. I am not going to apologize for telling you 
what rock is. Rock is the consolidation into one, of varied constituents, 
resulting in strength and durability. There are of course different kinds 
of rock. Break off a piece of the rock, and petros is in your hand. You 
may stand or sit down upon essential rock in all its bulk and majesty, 
and it is the consolidation into one substance of varied constituents, 
resulting in strength and durability. The constituents in their 
separation may not be characterized necessarily by strength and 
durability, but when welded and compounded into one, rock is the 
result. 

Amid all the varieties, take granite. It will be agreed that there 
is no more perfect illustration of the strength of rock, than granite. 
What is granite ? What are its varied constituents ?
Quartz, feldspar, 
mica. Quartz is never characterized by durability and strength, 
neither is feldspar nor mica. But when these three are compounded 
together, the strength of the granite is recognized, and its durability. 
We are not dealing with the question of how it is done. In the main 
there are two kinds of rock, igneous and aqueous ;
in the one the result 
of fire, and in the other the result of the action of water. 

Jesus said to this man, “ 
Thou shalt be called rock.” There shall 
be in thee the consolidation of constituent parts into one compounded 
whole which shall be characterized by durability and strength. Some 
of us know experimentally what our Lord meant.

Yes, but that does not exhaust the meaning of it. If He employed 
the figure, the natural figure of rock, there was a spiritual significance 
in it. This Jew, Simon, was standing facing his Messiah, and hearing 
Him speak. Whether at the moment he perfectly apprehended the 
profound significance of that ilhrstration
of rock I am not prepared 
to say. I am sure he did later. Study his letters and that is found 
out. The Messiah looked at this man, not so much looking at him as 
through him, and He adopted the language of the literature of the 
Hebrew Scriptures, which was that of expectation. He had come to 
fulfil
the expectations of that sacred Literature. 

Therefore we take up this figure of speech in the Old Testament,
and go through it to find the references to rock. There are different 
Hebrew words translated by that word rock. There is one meaning 
the same as petra,
the word tsur.
Go through the Old Testament, the 
history, prophets, and psalms, and that word rock is used figuratively, 
occurring some forty times, beginning in the book of Deuteronomy. 
It comes out also in the Psalms. The arresting fact is that wherever 
it is so used figuratively, it is reserved for Deity. I have said Deity, 
rather than God, and for this reason. There are two occasions only 
where it is used of false gods, in Deuteronomy xxxii. 31 and 37. There 

I.5
226 PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

faIse
gods are being put into contrast with the true God. In every

other case the symbol is used of the living God, when used in a figurative 

sense. 

It may be argued, What about the reference in Isaiah to a man as

the shadow of a great rock in a weary land ?
Who is the Man ?
We 

have no right to apply that to ourselves. It is the great prophetic

foreshowing of God manifest in the flesh, the Man a shadow of a great

rock in a weary land, and it is full of beauty in that way ;
but it is 

always a type of God. Jesus looked at Peter and said, “
Thou shalt 

be called rock.” Rock is the symbol of His strength, the strength

of the Almighty, the durability of God.

What is rock in the natural world ? The consolidation into one 
of varied constituent parts, resulting in strength and durability. When 
that is applied to God, it suggests that His strength results from theperfect harmony of all the facts of His Being in the unity of His Godhead. 
That is why God is strong, changeless, and even the crumblingrocks that seem to us to speak of permanance
on earth level, are 
imperfect symbols of the strength of God.

Jesus said to this man, “ 
Thou shalt be called rock.” He told this 
man that he should be brought to a position and an experience oflife in which he should share the Divine nature. Again a statementlike that may sound very daring and startling. Not at all. WhenPeter wrote his letters, he said that we have become “
partakers ofthe Divine nature.” The great thought in the word rock here suggeststhe partaking of the Divine nature that welds the constituent elementsinto strength and durability ;
“ 
thou shalt be called rock.” That is 
an attempt to explain or understand the figure of speech.

In conclusion, what do we Iearn
as we listen to this word of Christ ?
First, Christ’s absolute confidence in Himself. God Almighty deliverus from this age that is trying to account for Him on the human levelonly. Everything He said was final, and superb. Everything He saidwas awe-inspiring. The first thing I notice when He looked into theeyes of this man Simon, and said, I 
Thou shalt be called rock,” was 
His absolute confidence in Himself, in His own ofice,
in His Messiah-
ship, in His own nature. Oh yes, He knew man. That is manifest inthat first word, “ 
Thou art Simon the son of Jonah.” How much lies 
behind that, we do not know, but we can imagine. We may be wrong,
but from all we know of this man after, he had probably been a difficultcharacter to deal with ;
a man of tremendous possibilities, ofmarvellous
intelligence, of great emotional nature, and of dogged will ;
and yetas weak as water. Jesus said to him, I know you ;
I know your father;
and I know you. He knew his weakness. He knew his instability.
He knew his potentialities ;
that in that human personality wereresident all things that make for greatness. The strength was thereonly potentially ;
the durability was not there ;
but He knew Himself. 
He knew what He could do with that shaly, shifting sort of stuff. He 

ANGELS AND LADDER 

could transmute it into rock. No word He used ever revealed more 
His confidence in Himself, “ 
Thou shalt be called rock,” 

That is the implication in what Jesus said to this man of processes.
He did not say Thou art rock, but ” 
Thou shalt be called rock.” When 
the hour came at Casarea Philippi
when he had passed through threeyears of partnership with Jesus, and at last had found the Messiahin a new way, he said, “
Thou art the Messiah, the Son of the livingGod,” and Jesus said, “ 
Thou art rock.” He had arrived. There was 
a great deal to be done with that bit of rock, a good deal of toolingand chiselling
before it became a fitting
stone for the eternal habitation,
but he was rock. At the beginning, I 
Thou shalt be called rock.” Yes,
He knew His own ability. He knew His own power. He knew whatHe could do with a man like that ;
and upon the basis of that knowledgeand His own perfect self-confidence, He made the prediction, “
Thou 
shalt ‘be called rock.” Processes, yes, but he arrived.

Of course the one thing that comes to the heart in conclusion isthis, the worth of human personality. It can be changed from shaleto rock, but only in one way. That is the way of the meeting withJesus, and the yielding to Him, and the trusting in Him, and theobeying of Him. If any man, however shifty, however much the friendsmay say they cannot depend on him, come to this Christ, yieId
to 
Him ;
He will never let him go until he is a human being in thelikeness of God, and men can build on him. 

46. Angels and Ladder 
John i :
47-51
E ARE still with our Lord in the first days of His public ministry.vv
Nathanael was the fifth of the group constituting His earliestdisciples. He stands out, of course, by reason of our Lord’s remarkable 
description of him ;
a wonderful revelation of the man, especiallyfalling from the lips that spoke no idle or careless word. As He saw 
him coming to Him, brought by Philip, before He had any conversationwith him, He said concerning him, unquestionably to those who wereround about, “
Behold, an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile.” That 
is a remarkable description of the man, linking him up with the historyof the ancient people of God, by the use of the name Israel, given toone Jacob in connection with that night, when God crowned him bycrippling him, that name that means ruled by God, Isra-el. Jesus saw 
Nathanael, and said, Here is one who fulfils the ideal of the name, “
an 
Israelite indeed.” Moreover, He added that word which I neverread without thinking that in the mind of our blessed Lord was thethought of the man to whom the name was originally given. Jacob 

228 PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

was characterized by guile, by extremely shrewd cleverness ;
and by 

ability to practise
a good deal of deceit in his own interests. We know 

all his clever meanness in dealing with Laban,
but I am always glad 

he proved one too many for Laban.
But here was a man who Jesus said fulfilled the ideal suggested by 

the name, marking his relationship to all the spiritual values suggested 

by the name ;
an Israelite indeed, in whom there was no trickery, no 

double dealing, a clean, transparent soul, submitted to the authority 

of God. It was a great definition. 

The words we are to consider are the background of the story of 

Nathanael. They were not, however, addressed to Nathanael alone, 

but to the group. There is a sudden transition from the singular to 

the plural, in what our Lord said. He first talked to Nathanael, 

“
Because I said unto thee, I saw thee underneath the fig-tree, believest 

thou ? thou shalt see greater things than these. And He said unto 

him,” but He dropped into the pIura1,
”
VeriIy,
verily I say unto you, 

Ye shall see the heaven opened, and the angels of God ascending and 

descending upon the Son of man.” There are other occasions in the 

records, when our Lord did that very thing. We shall find
it later on 

in this Gospel, when He was talking to Peter, He suddenly dropped 

into the plural, “
Let not your heart be troubled.” I only emphasize 

it because the words we are now considering were spoken to the group 

of disciples round about Him at the time. How many more heard 

Him, of course we have no means of knowing. 

What then was the subject which our Lord was intending to illustrate 
when He said that to this group of men ? Secondly, what was 
the figure He employed ?
All that so that we may consider the abiding 
value of the teaching for us. 

Turn to the subject illustrated. Notice the method and setting of 
the thing Jesus said. Observe first that He opened with that formula, 
“ 
Verily, verily.” Another interesting thing to notice in passing is 
that John is the only one who announces that Jesus used that formula 
in that form. No less than twenty-five times in the course of his 
Gospel it is found. Our Lord introduced something He had to say 
by that formula, “ 
Verily, verily.” Matthew, Mark, and Luke all reportHim as saying “ 
Verily,” and not one of them uses it twice. We may 
ask, Which did He say ?
My opinion is that John was the more 
acute listener, and noticed the double affirmation, the Amen, Amen, 
for that is the word. It is the method showing that He had something 
of tremendous importance to say. The formula always marks urgency. 
It is as though our Lord had been saying something, and then wished 
to re-arrest attention, and to fasten attention upon something now to 
be said of urgent importance. It is a great study, because wherever 
it is found it leads to something of urgency, and occurs as a rule in 
the midst of other statements. That is the first thing to notice in His 
method. 

ANGELS AND LADDER 

Then this is the first occasion on record, considering the life of 
Jesus from the chronological standpoint, when we find Him using the 
term “ 
Son of man.” We are here at the beginning of His public 
ministry. That was our Lord’s favourite designation of Himself, ”
the 
Son of man.” It is also arresting how constantly He used it. This is 
the first occasion, and He always used it of Himself. We never find 
anyone else using it of Him in these Gospel records. No man called 
Him that. No demon called Him that. His enemies never called Him 
that, nor are His friends reported as calling Him that. It was His 
own name for Himself, with one exception. In John xii. 34,
on that 
day when the Greeks had come to Him, and He was saying things of 
great import, someone in the crowd said, We know about the Christ, 
or the Messiah. What dost Thou mean when Thou sayest, the Son 
of man must be lifted up. Who is this Son of man ? Just once the 
phrase is found on the lips of enquirers, and evidently the very form 
of the statement shows it was a peculiar designation for Himself. 
They felt at that moment He was claiming Messiahship. His disciples 
had confessed Him Messiah, and others knew He was claiming it ;
and a voice from the crowd spoke, What is Thy view ?
Who is this 
Son of man ?
Notice that voice linked the phrase which He was using 
with the idea of the Christ, or the Messiah. We know about the Christ. 
Who is the Son of man ?
Then notice again we are observing the method and setting that 
this was an immediate answer or response to Nathanael’s confession 
concerning Him. Nathanael had said, “
Thou art the Son of God ;
Thou art the King of Israel.” Then Jesus, continuing the conversation 
had said to him, Do you believe because I said I knew you before 
Philip found you ?
You shall see greater things than these. Then 
speaking in the plural, You shall see the heaven opened and the angels 
of God ascending and descending upon the Son of man. “
Thou art 
the Son of God.” He did not deny it, but what He called Himself on 
that self-same occasion was “ 
Son of man.” 

Then the setting of Nathanael’s confession in the presence of our 
Lord’s supreme knowledge and our Lord’s declaration, “
Thou shalt 
see greater things than these,” and then His interpretation of that. 
What are the greater things ?
To summarize everything, the purpose 
and issue of His presence in the world, the Son of man ;
and the 
purpose and issue, angels ascending and descending upon the Son 
of man, and the heavens open. Through Him there is this link between 
the heaven that had been closed, and the earth that had been in 
ignorance. The purpose then of the subject illustrated was that of 
Himself, in His incarnation, and as to its purpose. 

Look now at the figure employed. It is quite evident that our Lord 
was referring to something that had happened, and that was recorded 
in their history. It is found in Genesis xxviii. It is the story of Jacob 
who became Israel. He was travelling away in disobedience, going 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

away from home to a distant place, as the result of his duplicity ofwhich his mother was the inspiration. He laid him down in a placecalled Luz, to sleep, and put his head upon a stone. He dreamed a 
dream, and in the dream he saw a stairway. I do not like the translation 
“ 
a ladder.” The Hebrew word literally means a stairway, a 
terrace. And he saw Jehovah in the dream, and He was seen standingnot at the top of the stairway, as our translation might lead us tothink, above it. No, He was right there, on the earth by the side of 
Jacob. The ladder, the stairway, was standing. When Jacob woke,
he said, God is here ;
Lo, God is in this place. He saw the stairway,
and there is the picture out of the dream. Jacob and Jehovah close 
together, and right from the place where they were close togetherin the dream, the sweeping stairway moved up until it was lost inheaven. Ascending and descending messengers of heaven in theirorder-angels is the true word, which means in the Old Testamentas in the New, messengers-were going up, bearing messages.
They were coming down, bearing messages. That is the 
picture.

I believe Nathanael had been reading about Jacob when he was 
under the fig-tree. I believe he had read of his home-coming whenGod crippled him to make him Isra-el. That was all in his mind, Ibelieve, and our Lord took as His illustration the first description ofhim, the things he had been thinking about under the fig-tree, in theplace of his quietness and his devotion. Have you believed becauseyou were told I knew you before Philip found you ?
You shall see 
greater things. You shall see heaven opened, as Jacob did, when hewas going out from home. You shall see heaven open, and you shallsee what Jacob saw, angels ascending and descending upon the stairway, 
and the way shall be the Son of man. The figure He was usingwas that of the ancient dream. 

What did that mean to Jacob at the time ? It was a revelation of 
Jehovah’s care for him, of Jehovah’s love of him. I stress again thepoint that how at that moment he was going away from home undera cloud. Nobody can defend his action by which he gained what hefelt he ought to have, the birthright from Esau. We do not defendJacob there. It was his in the economy of God, but we really do nothelp God, but postpone the realization of His purpose when by trickswe try to aid Him in
bringing it about. So it was for this man. He 
was going out under a cloud. Of course distances to-day are so different.
Take the map, and look at his journey. The country from whichhe passed, and the country to which he was going. It meant completeexile from home. One can easily imagine his restlessness that night,
and his sense of loneliness, accentuated by the conviction that it washis own wrongdoing that was driving him out. He had this vision,
and he found that God was there. 

When he awoke, what did he say ?
“
This is none other than the 

ANGELS AND LADDER 

house of God ; 
this is the gate of heaven.” But he said something far

more than that, He said, “
Lo, God is here, He is in this place, and

I knew it not.” Mark the tenses there. The present conviction put

into contrast with the past ignorance. “ 
Lo, God is here.” When 

I laid down last night I did not recognize that. I did not know it. 

did not think of God as here. No, probably he thought he had offended

God, and that God had abandoned him, and that he would have to do

the best he could. But that vision, the Lord standing there, Jehovah

manifesting Himself in his dream as there, was close to him ;
and lo, 

the stairway and angels going up, and coming down, and Jacob learned

that night how God cared. We cannot go on with that, for it is a sordid 

story. The very next thing we find is Jacob bargaining with God. If 

You do so and so, I will do so and so. He was a mean soul. Neverthe
less that great revelation had come. That was the vision our Lord

recalled to the mind of Nathanael when He said, “ 
Greater things,” 

and greater things are included in these. Thou shall see the heaven 

opened and angels ascending and descending upon the Son of 

man. 

In that whole scene, and in that use of the figure of speech gatheredfrom a piece of history in the sacred writings with which Nathanaelwas most familiar, undoubtedly there stands for us for evermore arevelation of the fact of the interrelationship between heaven andearth, that they are not divided, that they are not so far apart, thatearth can have dealing with heaven, and heaven dealing with earth.
That was the general lesson taught by the vision of Jacob, and thatwas the tremendous fact Jesus had come to teach humanity atlarge.

Mark how the two spheres merge in His own Personality, the Sonof God and the Son of man. He belonged to the heavenly abode andthe heavenly region and the heavenly order. Yes, but He belongedto the earthly region and abode and order. He was Son of man.
Heaven and earth were linked in His Person. And it was an unveilingof that fact that He announced to men through Himself. ThroughHim the door closed should be opened. The Old Version rendered it,
“ 
Thou shalt see heaven open.” The Revisers have it, “
Ye shall see 
the heaven opened.” The very form in which it is stated suggests thefact the door was shut, that man had somehow lost his connection, 
his sense of relationship with the heavenly world and order. SaidJesus, Through Me that door shall be opened. “
Ye shall see the heaven 
opened,” and left open through Me.

Then the angels, what are we going to do with them ?
I would 
advise you to do nothing with them, but accept them, and believewhat He said. Of course we have got beyond medieval art. Modern 
art knows nothing of the angels. We have lost the angels in ourthinking, and our philosophy. We do not believe in angels. No, weare largely Sadducean !
They believed neither in resurrection, angel, 

232
PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

or spirit. As surely as you let the angels go, you are likely to let the 
Spirit of God and the resurrection go. That is the danger. That is 
where that philosophy leads. 

“ 
Angels ascending and descending.” He said so, and I
think He 
was remembering the Old Testament story. He knew the Scriptures 
in His human life. He knew of the angelic visitation and ministry, 
remembering possibly that very word, “
The angel of the Lord encampeth 
round about them that fear Him.” At any rate He said that 
the ministry of heavenly beings should be maintained between heaven 
and the earth upon Him, and through Him. 

The writer of the letter to the Hebrews had a strong conviction 
about angels when he said, “
Are they not all ministering spirits, sent 
forth to do service for the sake of them that shall inherit salvation ?
”
The word “
ministering ”
is liturgical, that is the anglicizing
of the
Greek word. The double function of the angels is revealed in that 
great word. First they are liturgical. That is their supreme function, 
that of adoration in worship in the presence of the eternal Throne, 
and the ineffable glory of God. Go back to Isaiah, and we find that 
in the vision Isaiah had, he saw the seraphim, and saw them engaged 
in liturgical service. They were crying out, ”
Holy, Holy, Holy, is 
the Lord of hosts ;
the whole earth is full of His glory.” That is 
praise, that is worship, that is liturgical service, and the writer of the 
Hebrew letter says that is their function. 

But sometimes that exercise ceases. They are sent forth to minister, 
to do service to those who are heirs of salvation, the ministry of angels 
on behalf of such. Again that is seen in that very passage of Isaiah. 
He saw that vision of the angels, heard their anthems, and then itwas he cried, Lo, I am a man of unclean lips. Then one of them 
was sent forth to catch from the altar the live coal, and touch 
the lips of the sinner, and cleanse him. They are sent forth to 
minister. 

This is not out of date. There are very many things we know 
for certain that we cannot prove. My last word is that of testimony. 
I am sure we are surrounded by angel ministry, “
angels ascending 
and descending upon the Son of man.” The angel ministry had 
largely ceased until He was near, then coming again, in the TempIe
one appeared, to Zacharias, and another to Mary. They have not 
appeared often. I do not say they never do, or never will ;
but I 
believe we are compassed about with a cloud of those who serve us 
through Jesus Christ. 
THE TEMPLE OF HIS BODY 

47. The Temple of His Body 
John ii :
13-22 

HIS parabolic illustration was brief in utterance and yet soTpregnant in its meaning that it demands careful and close attention. 
It is found in a few words in the nineteenth verse, “
Destroythis temple, and in three days I will raise it up.”

The occasion was that of our Lord’s first visit to Jerusalem at 
the commencement of His ministry. He had come down from Cana
where the great sign had been wrought. He had travelled down with 
His Mother and His brethren to Capernaum, and He had stayedthere ‘ 
not many days.” The Passover feast was about to be observed 
in Jerusalem. He travelled up there, and it would seem that He wentdirectly to the Temple, for that is the first thing we read.

We are told what He found when He arrived there, the desecrationof His Father’s house, that desecration taking place in the Gentile 
courts. It is well to remember that, because those who bought andsold and changed money, would not have allowed that in the courtsstrictly set apart to the Jew. It was a sign of the times that theyfelt the Gentile courts were only of value as they might help the Jewas he came up to his worship.

Notice our Lord included everything in His description, “
MyFather’s house.” That included the Gentile courts where this business 
was being carried on. We know what He did. He cleansed thosecourts. It is a graphic picture, told in simple yet sublime languageby John. He did the same thing again at the close of His ministry.
Here He made a whip, a scourge of small cords. It is futile to discuss 
whether He struck anyone. It is so foolish. Do you think He did, 
says someone ?
I do not know, and I do not want to know. Personally 
I believe that with that symbolic scourge in His hands, He advancedupon that crowd, and there was a majesty in His mien that they sawsomething of His might. If He hit anyone, I am sure it hurt them,
but I am not careful about that. This anemic
view of Jesus that 
He would not hit a man, is not true. That, however, is the background.
He cleansed the Temple, and drove out the animals, and overturnedthe tables of the money-changers, and sent the whole crowd out. He 
said to those in charge of the doors, “
Take these things hence ;
make 
not My Father’s house a house of merchandise.” Do you supposeHe spoke with any other voice than anger, when He said that ?
If 
you imagine so, you have a different view of our Lord from my own.
He cleansed the Temple.

It was that occasion that led up to the word we are to consider.
We are told that the Jews, the rulers, those in authority, representingthe Hebrew people, came to Him, and demanded a sign, and they 

234 PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

did it in this way. “
What sign shewest
Thou unto us, seeing that

Thou doest these things ?
”
What things ?
The things He had been

doing, driving out the animals, setting loose the birds, rolling over

the coins, and sending the traffickers out of His Father’s house. They

said, Give us a sign.

Now the demand for a sign was one that He would give them

evidence of what right He had to do the things that He was then

doing. It was a challenge as to His authority. Wherein was His

authority ? In what was it vital ? He had come without apology,

apparently only a Peasant, garbed in home-made garments, and He

had gone into the sacred precincts, and had destroyed for the nonce
at least, the vested interests permitted by all the hierarchy of the

priestly caste ;
indeed from those traffickers, Annas
and others were 

making vast profits. He came and swept it all out. They wanted

to know what was His right to do this. It was a challenge as to His

authority, although they did not, on that occasion, according to the

record, use the word, authority. Later, however, in the same Temple,

they used the word. Matthew records it in his twenty-first chapter,

Mark in his eleventh, and Luke in his twentieth. They all record

the fact that the rulers came to Him, and asked, “
By what authority

doest Thou these things ?
”
In the fifth chapter of John’s Gospel

(v. 27),
when our Lord was dealing with these rulers, said of Hisrelationship to God, “
He gave Him authority to execute judgment,
because He is the Son of man.” 
That was the whole question that was raised here. He did these 
things by some power that was irresistible. What right had He todo them ?
What was His authority ? What they asked for was a signof His authority. That was the background. Following our habit,
we first consider a little more particularly the subject illustratedwhen our Lord made use of these words ;
then look at the figureemployed when He said, “
Destroy this temple ”
;
and finally, necessarily, 
the teaching deduced.

What was the subject under consideration on the day that ourLord said, “
Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up ”
? 
He had been challenged concerning His right to exercise authority,
that was evidently kingly, that was also priestly, to say nothing ofthe prophetic office. He had been challenged as to what right He hadto usurp the position of a king, and of a priest, and to interfere withthe orderly and permitted arrangements of the Temple. That wasthe subject.

The parabolic illustration that we are taking does not declare Hisauthority, does not declare its nature, but as a sign it reveals it.
That is what they wanted, and that is what He gave them. In those 
mystic words He intended to illustrate His authority, and the supremeproof of that authority. It is a great question, that of the authorityof our Lord. Take the thought and watch it through. These men 

THE TEMPLE OF HIS BODY 

were challenging Him there. They doubted that He had any adequate

authority, and in order to find out, as they thought, they wanted

something to prove it. If an adequate proof of authority could be

found, the nature of the authority would be revealed. That is what 

our Lord was doing.

What was the figure He employed ?
He said, “
Destroy this

temple.” He used a word that everyone sees, and that men then saw,

referred to the place where He was. He had gone up to the Temple.

He was in the Temple, and their minds instinctively went out to the

Temple. It was the centre of national and religious life. They had

not forgotten the deep things of their own history. The Temple was

the very dwelling-place and Throne of God. In that place He used

that figure, “ 
Destroy this temple.” The marginal reading here is

sanctuary, and that is an attempt to show a distinction. What was 

the sanctuary?
The temple was Herod
and the word temple covered all theprecincts, all the courts and buildings of that wonderful andmarvellous
temple, which as Jesus stood in it then, was not finished. These 
men said presently, ‘ 
Forty and six years was this temple in building.” 
No, they said, “ 
Forty and six years has this temple been in building.”
It was not finished until ten years after the crucifixion. They werestill building some parts of it. It is a rather long time, as we buildto-day ;
but they built well in those days. The word temple,hieron.
covered the whole fact. But Jesus did not use that word that covers 
the whole fact, when He said “ 
Destroy this temple.” That is whythe revisers have suggested a change, and have put the word sanctuaryin the margin, in which they are justified. The word He used wasnaos,
which means the Holy of Holies.
The real ideal of God was in 
the tabernacle with its outer court, the holy place, and then the veil,
and the Holy of Holies.
Broadly that pattern had been adopted inthe building of every successive temple, and it was still there. There 
were the outer courts, and the holy place, and the Holy ofHolies,
and that was the naos, that was the sanctuary, the centre of the wholetemple. Jesus at this point used the word that referred not to thewhole temple, but to the inner sanctuary.

I know when they replied to Him they said, “
Forty and six yearshath this temple been in building,” and they used the same wordHe used, but evidently they were referring to the whole structure,
because they did not take forty-six years to build the Holy ofHolies.
He had not said so, He had said the naos, the Holy of Holies,
the 
sacred centre of everything ;
destroy that. We know, because theevangelist has told us, although He used the terminology that referredto the place that He was in, and they understood He was referringto the, place ;
He was not referring to it. “
He spake of the templeof His body.”

Here then our Lord was using a figure of speech, employing it 

236
PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

of His body, the Holy of Holies,
the dwelling-place of God, the place

of the Divine revealing, the centre where God and man met by His

appointment. All that applied to the material temple, but He was

thinking of His own body. Of that He said, “
Destroy this temple,

and in three days I will raise it up.” So the subject illustrated was

that of His authority; and the figure He employed was that of His

body.

What did He say about it ?
Mark first of all that He did not say,

I will destroy, but He told them that they would. It is an imperative. 

He challenged them ;
He dared them. He knew whereunto all
their 

hostility to Him would run, and how it would end. He saw the issue 

and that unbelieving and questioning rebellion that was manifest

in the challenge as to His authority. He saw it all, and He said,

Destroy this temple, this body of Mine. It was an imperative. He

challenged them ;
He dared them. He knew what they were doing.

“ 
Destroy this temple.” That is the first thing.

We pause to remind ourselves how terribly they distorted thatsaying of Jesus at the end. When on trial, Matthew records that false 
witness was borne, in that someone said, “
This Man said, I am able 
to destroy the Temple of God, and to build it in three days.“ He 
never said anything of the kind. Mark tells us that the false witnesses 
said, I
We heard Him say, I will destroy this temple that is madewith hands, and in three days I will build another made withouthands.” Again, He said nothing of the kind. The memory of thatsaying at the beginning they were not careful to be accurate in whatthey said then. We only refer to it, to draw attention to what He

said. “
Destroy this temple,” this naos, this body in which God is

dwelling, and which is His appointed meeting-place between manand Himself, dissolve it ;
that was the word, “destroy it,” then what ?
“ 
In three days I will raise it up.”

What did He mean ? There can be but one answer to it. He meant 
this. You ask Me for a sign, demonstrating My authority. Thereis one sign, which will demonstrate it absolutely ;
My death, whichyou will bring about on the bodily plane. My resurrection I will bringabout in the power that is Mine. The sign they asked for was Hisdeath and resurrection. They did not understand Him. His disciplesdid not understand Him. John is honest enough to tell us that afterHe had risen from the dead they understood what He had said.
The secret of His authority is demonstrated by His death and Hisresurrection. 

Later on we have the same thing with other wording. Matthewhas told us “
certain of the scribes and Pharisees answered Him,
saying, Master, we would seek a sign from Thee.” Listen to His 
answer. “
An evil and adulterous generation seeketh after a sign;
and there shall no sign be given to it but the sign of Jonah the prophet;
for as Jonah was three days and three nights in the belly of the whale ;
THE TEMPLE OF HIS BODY 
so shall the Son of man be three days and three nights in the heartof the earth.” Those two great facts of His death and resurrectionconstitute the sign and the only sign of the authority of the Son of 
man. In having the sign of authority, He revealed the nature ofHis authority; His right to cleanse the temple, His right to heal, Hisright to do whatever He did was vested in the mystery of His death,
and the marvel of His resurrection. If it is said to-day, and it is terriblytrue, there are multitudes of people who are seeking a sign, and questioning 
His authority, they constitute an evil and adulterous generation.
That sign abides.

If any ask for proof of the final authority of Christ as King, and 
Priest, where is it found ?
Not in His teaching, great and vital as itwas and is ;
not in those signs that we speak of as His miracles, marvelsas they were ;
not in the example of His perfect life, radiant andbeautiful in holiness as it was. No, the thing that proves His authorityis His death and His resurrection. Not the death alone. Of course 
there is no such thing as resurrection if there is no such thing as death.
The death was brought about by the evil heart of man. The resurrection 
was brought about by the almighty power of God. These two 
things together.

They constitute the abiding sign of our Lord’s authority for theworld to-day, for this age, for this city, for this nation. What authorityhas Jesus Christ ?
Give us a sign of it. Go back to Calvary, and theempty tomb in Joseph of Arimathea’s garden and we shall find it.
That is the sign of His authority. His system of ethics is not a revelation 
of His authority. We have laws, and an ethical system, and callit Christianity. It is not Christianity. We can have a psychologicalapproach to the problems of the human mind, but it is not Christianity.
Christianity is vested in the absolute final authority of Christ, andthe sign of it is His death and resurrection.

We turn to inspiration, and listen to Paul. Read again thatfifteenth chapter of his first letter to the Corinthians, wherein everyword is of infinite value. Out of one paragraph (I+-rg)
take the 
threefold movement, beginning, “
If Christ hath not been raised, thenis our preaching vain, your faith also is vain.” “
If Christ hath not 
been raised, your faith is vain ;
ye are yet in your sins. Then they alsowhich are fallen asleep in Christ have perished.” “
If in this life onlywe have hoped in Christ, we are of all men most pitiabIe.
It is when 
we have considered the “ 
Ifs,” then we pass to the great affirmation, 
“
But now hath Christ been raised from the dead ”
;
and that resurrection 
being the answer of the power of God to the evil that is in men’s 
hearts that put Him on His Cross, is the sign of His present and eternalauthority. 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

48. The Wind and the Spirit 
John iii : 8 

0 
0 
UR LORD was still in Jerusalem on His first visit there accordingto the records, during the period of His public ministry. It was 
on that occasion that Nicodemus, a ruler, and the teacher in Israel 
sought an interview with Him. There is significance in the phrasethat he was “ 
the teacher of Israel.” To use a phrase of these times, 
he was the popular teacher, a man greatly sought after, as I believebecause of the eminence of his intellect and his acquaintance withthe Holy Scriptures. I think that is what our Lord meant when He 
said, “
Art thou the teacher of Israel, and understandeth not these 
things ?
”
Be that as it may, he certainly was a teacher and ruler.
This was the man who sought an interview with Jesus.
The first twenty-one verses of this chapter give us the story of thatinterview. Some believe that the words of our Lord recorded in this 
chapter ceased at the fifteenth verse, and that the paragraph commencing, 
“ 
For God so loved the world,” constituted John’s interpretation 
of what our Lord was saying. Without arguing about it,
I reject that view, and am convinced the words in verse sixteen fellfrom the lips of our Lord Himself. In the midst, however, of the storyof the interview with Nicodemus, our Lord used two illustrations, one 
from Nature, and the other from the history of the nation of Israel.
The one from Nature was, “
The wind bloweth where it listeth ”
;
the 
other from the history of IsraeI,
with which Nicodemus would be 
familiar, “ 
As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness.” We 
are now concerned with the first of these, considering the second in 
our next study.
The wind and the Spirit. Following our usual custom, we firstask What was the subject illustrated ?-an important matter; thenlook at the figure employed, that of the wind ;
finally, necessarily,
the teaching to be deduced for Nicodemus, for us, and for alltime. 

What was our Lord illustrating when He said, “
The wind bloweth
where it listeth ? ”
It was the illustrative part of His answer to aquestion of Nicodemus. Nicodemus had said, “
How can a man be 
born when he is old ?
”
The declaration that Jesus had just made,
and gave rise to the question of Nicodemus was this. Christ had 
declared to him that the Kingdom of God demands a new personality.
He told him that no man could see it unless he was born artothen,
from 
above ;
a new personality. In the second part, just after this illustration 
He said that except a man were born anew, from above, he couldnot enter into the Kingdom of God.

Those are the two declarations. Christ said that the Kingdom 

THE WIND AND THE SPIRIT 
of God, in order to its apprehension and its experience, demanded a

new personality. Nicodemus had come up, as I think with great

honesty, for I hold a brief for Nicodemus. I always dislike those who

say he was cowardly, because he came to Jesus by night. Not at all. 

He was no fool. He wanted to have Jesus all to himself, and that

was the time to find Him, when the crowds were not there. He was 

a man of great intellectual ability ;
and he came up with that assertion,

which was a great assertion, “
We know that Thou art a Teacher come 

from God ;
for no man can do these signs that Thou doest, except

God be with Him.” In spite of the clear understanding that char
acterized his outlook, and his conception of truth concerning Christ,

Christ crashed across it the word that discounted all his cleverness,

though it was on a high level as He said, “
Except a man be born from

above, he cannot see the Kingdom of God.”

Later on, to trespass upon the next part of the story, He said,
“
Except a man be born of water and the Spirit he cannot enter intothe Kingdom of God.” Two things are necessary :
first of all, understanding, 
and in order to understanding there must be a new birthand a new personality ;
and secondly, experience, entering into it,
and in order to that there must be a new birth, a new personality.

If there is anything that the world needs to hear anew to-dayit is that one thing, that all human cleverness is of no use in givinga man to see or understand the Kingdom of God ;
and certainlyapart from a new birth, which results in a new personality, he cannotexperience the Kingship of God, and know the deep meaning ofit all. 

It was because our Lord had said that, that Nicodemus replied,
and it was a great thing he said, “
How can a man be born when 
he is old ?
”
Then he illustrated what was in his mind in the realm 
of the physical. Nicodemus did not consider the physical as beingthe whole of personality ;
when he spoke of a man he did not merelythink of his body. He was a Pharisee. He believed in the spiritualside of man’s nature. How can a man, an entire man, be born whenhe is old ? To show the incredulity of it, the impossibility of it, as itseemed to Nicodemus, he used the physical as an illustration. “
Can 
a man enter a second time into his mother’s womb, and be born ?”
When he first said, “
How can a man be born when he is old ?
”
he 
was thinking in the realm of personality in its entirety. He wasthinking unquestionably of all the past thinking of it in his own personality, 
that he was the result of all the years that had gone. Allthe processes of the past were merging in the I am of the present,
How can a man undo the past ? How can a man be born, begin, start,
when he is old ?
With great force he illustrated from his standpoint,
Can a man “ 
enter a second time into his mother’s womb, and beborn ?
”
Can the physical be taken and pulped back into embryonicstage, and be born again ? If that cannot be done with the physical, 

a40
PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

how can it be done with the whole of personality ? That wasthe question. Do not go away and speak of the ignorance ofNicodemus. It was an important question. It was a tremendousquestion.

How did our Lord answer that ? This leads to the illustration,
‘
Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born of water andthe Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God.” Then Jesuscorrected the mistake that Nicodemus was making in attempting toillustrate the whole of personality from the physical standpoint.
“
That which is born of the flesh is flesh ;
and that which is born of 
the Spirit is spirit.” That verse is constantly used, I think, in animproper way. Some read that and think that Jesus said that the 
flesh is inherently and entirely evil, and the spirit is other than that;
yet what is born of the flesh must be flesh, and what is born really ofthe Spirit is good. Nothing of the kind. He said in effect, You haveasked your question. You have used an illustration in the physicalrealm. Nicodemus, remember that the laws that govern the fleshand the laws that govern the spirit are not identical. I see yourdifficulty, as though our blessed Lord had said to him, in the realmof the flesh. No man can enter into the Kingdom until he be bornagain. That is the law of the flesh. That which is born of the fleshis flesh. Nicodemus, when you come into the realm of the Spirit youare coming into another realm. Things which cannot be in the realmof the flesh, perhaps, may be possible in the realm of the spirit. “
That 
which is born of the flesh is flesh ;
and that which is born of the Spiritis spirit.” “
Marvel not that I said unto thee, Ye must be born fromabove.” Stand in the presence of the thing you do not understand,
but do not marvel. You do not understand it. Your illustration 
in the realm of the flesh is well taken, and is true-but stay, there isa realm of the Spirit, and things may take place in that realm of theSpirit beyond your understanding. Do not marvel because you donot understand. That was the occasion of the illustration. He has 
lifted the question of Nicodemus away into another realm, a higherrealm of life and personality, which is the realm of the spirit. “
The 
wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the voice thereof, butknowest not whence it cometh,
and whither it goeth ;
so
is everyonethat is born of the Spirit.”

Our Lord was illustrating the fact that the operation of the Spiritis not an operation of the flesh. He charged this man not to be surprised 
for the necessity declared in the realm of the spirit ;
and then 
He took this illustration. 

Now look at the figure itself, the wind. The margin of the RevisedVersion suggests we might read there “
The spirit breatheth whereit listeth.“ There are those who have taken that view, and seem to 
think Christ was speaking all through of the operation of the Spirit.
While understanding that view, to accept it is to have broken down 

THE WIND AND THE SPIRIT 241
the analogy. There is no contrast in illustration here. If He is speak
ing of the Spirit, then He has gone into the realm of statement, and

not of illustration. Moreover, to take it in that way, “
The spirit

breatheth where it listeth, and thou hearest the voice thereof,” that 

cannot be said, because we never do hear the sound or voice of the 

Spirit. It may be quoted that on the day of Pentecost there came a 

sound from heaven, as of the rushing of a mighty wind. Yes, there 

was a wind, and the Spirit, but notice, it was like it. There was a 

sound, but the fact was of value. It was that which attracted the 

city outside, and the miracle of tongues which needs no repetition to

the end of time. 

The word “
wind ”
is pnezcma.
I admit this is an unusual use of it. 
The word occurs in more than one hundred and fifty passages in theNew Testament ;
twenty of which are in this Gospel of John. It is 
always rendered spirit, except here, and on one other occasion, when inthe book of Revelation we read that one beast had power to communicate 
life, or breath, or spirit to an image. On these two occasions 
we have a different rendering. It is a word used of God, of man, andof demons. The word in itself means quite literally, apart from itshigh value, a current of air, a breath, a breeze. The root of it is in 
that passage in Acts, “ 
a mighty rushing wind.” Here there can be 
no doubt whatever that our Lord used the wind, the breath, the 
breeze as illustrating the fact of the work of the Spirit. There is no 
question that our translators were right in rendering it wind
in the 
text, not as in the margin.

It is interesting, though not important, that possibly Jesus andNicodemus were on the house-top together in the night. Possibly theymay have been within the house in some upper chamber or room ina house-top. It may have been, as they talked, the wind at thatmoment was sweeping over the city. If they were in the house,
probably they heard the sighing and the soughing of the wind goingup the narrow streets of Jerusalem. Whether on the house-top, in thehouse, or in a garden, as my beloved friend Dr. Jowett believed, theone thing Jesus did here, as He was so constantly doing, was to takehold of something close to Him, the meaning of which the one towhom He was speaking could not but be conscious. “
Consider the 
lilies,” He said, and they were there. Wheat and tares, and everything 
else. So here with the wind. There on the house-top, therewas the reality which Nicodemus must have been conscious of. The 
wind was blowing. The sound demonstrated the fact. Nicodemusheard it, whether sweeping over the house-top, or sweeping throughthe narrow streets, or in a garden ;
there was no escape from it.
Nicodemus, you know that. Can you hear the wind ?
Now, Nicodemus, 
tell Me where it came from, where it began ?
Where is it going?
Nicodemus could not tell Him that. “
Thou knowest not whence it 
cometh,
and whither it goeth.
Someone said to me some time ago,

16 
242
PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

Of course that story has gone by the board. We do know where the 
wind has come from, and where it is going !
Well, it may look like it, 
but it is never so. We may read about depressions-and we will-
but can we explain perfectly how the depression is caused ?
Scientists 
may be sure they know all about it. Are they quite sure ?
I will use 
the Scats
phrase and say, “ 
I hae ma doots.” If we follow the weather 
reports on the radio, we find they do not know always. Let the 
pleasantry be forgotten, and take this fact. Nicodemus heard the 
wind blowing over the house-top. The sound demonstrated the fact 
of the wind. I will tell you what you do not know, Nicodemus. You 
do not know whence it came. You do not know whither it is going. 
You are in the presence of a reality demonstrated. You are in the 
presence of a mystery inexplicable. 

I wonder if there is any need to say any more. What a marvellous 
illustration. Keep it against its background. Remember Nicodemus’ 
false question, his false illustration ; 
our Lord’s correction of it, and 
His insistence upon the spiritual fact, a new personality by the birth 
of the Spirit. Carefully notice one thing in this. ‘
The wind bloweth 
where it Iisteth, and thou hearest the voice thereof, but knowest not 
whence it cometh, and whither it goeth ;
so
is everyone born of the 
Spirit.” It is of the utmost importance that we get the reality of the 
terms in their right relationship here. Jesus did not say the wind 
blows where it will, and so is the Spirit in His action. It was not a 
comparison in the ultimate between the wind and the Spirit. They 
are both there. It was a comparison between the man Nicodemus and 
that other Man. Thou hearest the sound thereof, and by that thou 
knowest the reality ;
but thou ca.nst
not tell whence it cometh or 
whither it goeth. Thou standest in the presence of mystery ;
so
is 
everyone that is born of the Spirit. Nicodemus, thy relation for the 
moment to this natural phenomenon is exactly the same relation a 
man born of the Spirit bears to that phenomenon. What is the 
similitude as to the wind ?
The wind is a demonstrated fact. There 
is a mystery in its operation. As to the Spirit, to the man born of the 
Spirit the fact is equally demonstrated by the results. So as thou art 

listening to the wind, not being sure of it ;
so
he that is born of the 
Spirit knows it incontrovertibly by its operation. As thou canst
not 
tell whence or whither the wind cometh and goeth ;
so
every man 
born of the Spirit has to recognize the mystery of the operation. He 
may not be able to explain whence or whither. He may not be able 
to unravel the tremendous mystery of the rebirth of personality in the 
realm of the Spirit ;
but he knows the fact. The fact is there, and 
the mystery is there. 

Now to summarize. This illustration consisted of a reinforcement 
and an appeal to employ the same activity in the things of the Spirit 
as in the things of Nature. In the realm of Nature we recognize the 
fact. We are conscious of the mystery. Do the same thing in the realm 

THE WIND AND THE SPIRIT 

of the Spirit. Act on the fact, and in accordance with it, recognizingall the while the mystery of the method. Our Lord only spoke of onedemonstration of the wind. It was that of the sound, of a voice. That 
was what they were conscious of there in the night time. There are 
other demonstrations of the wind. One is power. We know the powerof the wind ;
still we do not know whence it cometh,
or whither it 
goeth. The mystery is there, but the fact is there. So is everyone thatis born of the Spirit. Our Lord is really saying in effect, Nicodemus,
if you will act in the realm of the Spirit as you do most honestly inthe realm of Nature, where will you find yourself ?
Take the realm 
of Nature, and take the wind. Apply the old and familiar formula,
Obey the law of the force, and the force will obey you. Obey the lawof the wind, and the wind will fill the sails of the vessel and carry itacross the waters. If you obey the force, and the force becomes yourservant, you still do not understand the mystery. In the realm ofNature no man stands debating a mystery, and neglecting the force.
That is what Christ was saying in the realm of the Spirit. Obey thelaw of the Spirit, and the Spirit will obey you. Obey the law of thespiritual life, and the result will be that all the forces of that life willdemonstrate the reality of that birth which is the birth from above,
which is the birth of the Spirit.

We can take that tremendous statement and turn it round in 
another way. Disobey the law of the force, and the force will destroyyou, That is always so. Disobey the law of the wind, and the windwill wreck your vessel. Obey the law of the force, and it will obey you.
It is true of electricity. It is always true. Obey the law of electricityand it becomes your servant, lighting your buildings, driving yourvehicles, and all the things it is doing to-day. But disobey thelaw of that force, and it will blast you like the lightning ofdeath. 

It was no light thing Jesus said, and it was a tremendousiIlustration. 
Nicodemus, you hear the wind. You know the fact of the wind 
because you heard just now the voice of the wind ;
but you are standing 
in the presence of a mystery. Nicodemus, you must be born ofwater, which is the action of repentance, and the Spirit, which isthe action of regeneration. Though you do not understand themystery, obey the law, and the force will become your servant ;
and 
even though physically you cannot enter into your mother’s womb 
and be born again, yet in the great mystery of personality, central towhich is spirit always, you can be born again, be born anew, be bornfrom above, and find that new personality through which you shallunderstand and experience the Kingdom of God. 

244 PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

49. The Lifted Serpent 
John iii :
14 
0 UR
PREVIOUS study was concerned with the illustration of the

wind and the Spirit, by which our Lord illuminated His answer

to the first question of Nicodemus, “
How can a man be born when 

hc is old ?
”
Nicodemus then spoke again, and Jesus employed the

illustration of the lifted serpent in His answer to that second question,

“
How can these things be?
”
We pause here to notice that there was an essential difference

between the two questions which Nicodemus asked. The first was,

“
How can a man be born when he is old ?
”
It was not a flippant

question, but a serious one, revealing the fact that this man was

thinking. He did not deny what Christ had suggested as to the value

of a new beginning. Jesus said, “
Except a man be born from above he

cannot see the Kingdom of God.” Nicodemus did not question that

for a moment. What he did question was the possibility of the thing

suggested. How can a man be born all over again, as though the first

had never been. He is what he is as the result of all the years that

have gone. How can he start again ? It was an honest question, an

intelligent question, but it was one revealing a great deal of doubt as

to the possibility.

After our Lord had used that marvellous
simile of the wind and 

the Spirit, in which He summarized by telling him that in natural

things he did not refuse to act because there was mystery present, 
that he took hold of that which was patent and could not be denied.
The blowing of the wind which he heard, he acted upon it, thoughthere was mystery. He could not tell whence it came or whither it 
was going ; so is every man born of the Spirit. Every man that isborn of the Spirit obeys the law of the force, which cannot be denied,
although he cannot understand the mystery of the activity.

When Nicodemus heard that, he then asked this question, not howthe thing happened, but How can the thing be brought to pass? He 
was still in the same realm of difficulty. The word he used is a verysuggestive one, genesthai, not How can this happen ?
but How can 
it come to pass ?
I may take Nicodemus’ question, and render it alittle more fully than in our Versions. It might properly be rendered,
By what power can these things be caused to be ?
It is not a questionof there being, but of there becoming. The first thing is incredible.
Now if there is a law of the Spirit, how does it work ?
How can these 
things be brought to pass?
It was in answer to that question that our Lord used the illustration 
of the uplifted serpent. We may now proceed with the same threelines of consideration. First, the subject illustrated. Secondly, the 

THE LIFTED SERPENT 

figure He employed. Finally, of course, the teaching deducted for us

and for all time. 

What was the subject that Jesus was illustrating when He used

that historic figure ?
For a moment look at the twelfth verse, in which 

Jesus said, “
If I told you earthly things, and ye believe not, how

shall ye believe if I tell you heavenly things ?
”
We are apt to read

thjrt
as though our Lord meant, I cannot tell you the heavenly things.

He did not mean that, for He immediately proceeded to tell Nicodemus

the heavenly things. That is what He is now doing. He had told him 

the earthly things, the necessity on the earth level for a new per
sonality. He had illustrated that by a natural figure of speech, the

blowing of the wind. He had told him earthly things, and Nicodemus

was still in doubt. He could not understand. How would he believe 

if He drew aside the curtain and revealed the heavenly things. The

earthly things declared were those of necessity for a man to be born

from above, starting anew on the earth level. Nicodemus, you ask how

that can be brought about ?
The answer is that which brings you face

to face with heavemy
things ;
the action of heaven that makes possibIe
the earthly experience. Our Lord dealt with that from this point on,

the action whereby a man can, by the reception of a new life from

above, escape from his past. That is what had puzzled Nicodemus at

first, how he could not only see but enter into the whole experience of

the Kingdom of God. The secret of the life which liberates a human 

soul, and enables it, how that life is provided straight away, “
As 
Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son ofman be lifted up ;
that whosoever believeth may in Him have eternallife. For God so loved the world, that He gave His only begottenSon, that whosoever believeth on Him should not perish, but haveeternal life. For God sent not the Son into the world to judge theworld ; 
but that the world should be saved through Him.”

Those are the heavenly things. The earthly things, the necessityfor the recreating of personality, the liberation of the soul from theaccumulation and influences of the past, and the enablement of thesoul with a new life to enter upon the Kingdom of God experimentally;
these are the earthly things. You ask for the heavenly secrets. How 
will you believe if I do tell you ? And the great declaration 
comes, with the sixteenth verse, always taken in very closeconnection with the fourteenth and fifteenth, and also with theseventeenth. 

Notice how those two verses (16, 17) begin ;
“
For ... for.” That 
follows after the verse, “
As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, 
even so must the Son of man be lifted up ;
that whosoever 
believeth may in Him have eternal life. For . . .
Everything nowbeyond the illustration is in the heavenly realm. “ 
For God so loved,” 
and then “ 
For God sent not His Son to condemn, but to save.” Those 
are the heavenly things. Whereas we are not considering those verses 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

at any length, we are bound to recognize them from the standpoint ofthe Divine action, and the consequent human responsibility.

So we come at once to the illustration. “
As Moses lifted up the

serpent in the wilderness.” Having first used an illustration in the

realm of natural phenomena, He now used an illustration in the realm

of historic record. Nicodemus knew the Old Testament. He was the 

teacher of Israel, and he knew the Scriptures. We are familiar with it. 

The story is in Numbers xxi., the account of how Moses lifted up the 

serpent in the wilderness.

In looking at this figure, what did this uplifted serpent mean ? 
Why did Moses lift up that serpent in the wilderness ?
Because the 
people had been guilty of definite and positive rebellion against God.
There is one little sentence in that twenty-first chapter of Numbersthat tells the whole story. “ 
They spake against God.” That is thehistory behind this incident. The people definitely and wilfullyrebelled against the Divine government. “ 
They spake against God,”
and this story in Numbers tells us that as the result of that rebellionthere was a punitive action of God. There came to them thefiery serpents, and the deadly bite, and the terrible anguish andsuffering.

But we have not reached the lifted serpent. That is onlythe background. Why was the serpent lifted ? It was liftedbecause the people had rebelled against God, and because as theresult of their rebellion they were suffering punishment. That waswhy.

Now, said Jesus, as Moses lifted up that serpent ;
and we go backwith the simplicity of children to the story in Numbers, and say, Whydid Moses lift it up, and what did it mean when it was lifted up ? First,
he lifted it up by the authority of God, by the authority of the veryOne against Whom the people were in rebellion. “
They spake againstGod,” and that God Whose authority they were insulting and denyingarranged for the uplifted serpent.

Why was it lifted ? To give those who were suffering as the resultof their own rebellion an opportunity for return to the governmentof God. Let us get hold of that first. I know there is something else.
What were they to do ?
Moses was to make a serpent of brass, andlift it on a pole. What were they to do ? Look at the serpent ofbrass. It sounds almost foolish. It is not. Is there any healing inthat serpent of brass ? No, not so ;
no healing in it. Then why look?
Because God’s authority commanded it. His authority had beeninsulted. His authority ordered the elevation of that serpent, andmen were to look, and there could be no look which was not the resultof yielding to the Divine authority in a new start, a new beginning.
The God contemned
is now obeyed by those who look. There were 
hundreds who looked. It was a speculative look. There were thosewho did not look. We do know if they did not look they died by the 

THE LIFTED SERPENT 
poison of the bite. But the look was a yielding to a Divine command, 

and that is all. The work of the eyes had nothing in it of value. There 

was no healing in that uplifted serpent ;
but in obedience to a Divine 

command. So Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness ;
first 

upon the authority of God, and secondly to create for suffering men 

and women through their own sin an opportunity of return to the 

government of God that they had refused, by obedience to His 

command as they looked. 

Of course the third thing is involved in what we have said. That 

demanded repentance, a change of mind ;
an activity that grows out 

of a changed mind. If men and women in that camp heard the pro
clamation that God had appointed the lifted serpent, with the act 

of every head turned towards that serpent was the head of a repentant 

man ;
indicating a change of mind, no longer speaking against God, 

but obeying God. 

Finally, of course, on the fulfilment of these conditions a way of 

healing and of new life was provided for those smitten, stricken, and 

afflicted through their own sin. That was the story in Numbers. 

Moses lifted up the serpent on the authority of God to create a point 

at which man who had spoken against Him and was in rebellion, 

and consequently was suffering, could turn back, and by looking 

be healed and restored, in glorious simplicity of obedience to the 

command. 

Yet the sublime wonder of it. Every head turned was the head of 

someone who was repenting and now obeying the Divine command ;
and as and whenever a head was turned in obedience, expressed in the 

look, life and healing followed. 

Nicodemus, you know your history. You have asked about 
heavenly things, Let Me begin by taking you back to a page in
your 
history, as though Jesus had said, that well-known story of the serpent ;
and there you will see heavenly activity creating the opportunity for 
earthIy
activity ;
and when the heavenly activity and the earthly 
come into touch with each other, there is the way of life. “
As . . . 
so.
So we stand back as it were from the illustration, and at once see 
the greatness of it. There is revealed and suggested in this story in 
the wilderness the background of human need. What is it ?
Man 
perishing by reason of his rebellion against God. That is the whole 
story of this world’s agony and failure. That is the story of the failure 
of your life and mine. That is the story of the failure of all social 
reIationships.
That is the story of failure in national life, and international 
relationships. All in the last analysis is in rebellion against 
God ;
and perishing is the result. 

There is only one hope either for the individual or for the nation. 
What is it ?
A new beginning, a new birth, the communication of 
a new life which will liberate us from all the bondage of the past, 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

and enable us for all that lies ahead of us. I go back twenty years 
for my illustration, to those dark and terrible years. How constantly 
it was repeated in writings of men who perhaps would not claim what 
we would claim, of confidence and belief in the Christ of God ;
but 
over and over again we were told that what the world needed was a 
new spirit. It is wonderful how all unconsciously these men simply 
repeated what Jesus said, “ 
Ye must be born from above.” There 
is the background. Nicodemus was there, and Jesus was talking to 
him, and as He used this illustration, at the time showing the background 
in the history of men and women perishing by reason of rebellion, 
with no hope whatever ;
then something happened so that 
they should be healed, and have a new element in life. So we see the 
condition of the world, and humanity. 

Now in the foreground, our Lord told him the story of the Divine 
action. “
As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so 
must the Son of man be Iifted up.” ”
Lifted up ”
? Everyone knows 
what He meant, 

,I
.
.
.
lifted up, was He, to die.” 

That is what He meant. It is a great expression. We find it again 
upon the lips of Jesus (viii. 28).
He was talking then to His enemies. 
“
Jesus therefore said, When ye have lifted up the Son of man, then 
shall ye know that I am He, and that I do nothing from Myself, but 
as the Father taught Me, I speak these things.” And once again, we 
have the phrase on the lips of Jesus in the twelfth chapter, in that 
marvellous word, “
I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all 
men unto Myself.” He used the expression then when He was looking 
at the Cross, and more than the Cross He was looking through to the 
victory. So He said to Nicodemus, “
The Son of man must be lifted 
up.” 

So we are brought face to face with the Cross in a remarkable way 
by reason of the illustration. The serpent was lifted up by the authorityof God. So was the Son of man. The lifting up on the Cross of Jesus 
was not finally the act of man. It was the act of man’s sin ;
but He 
never had been lifted up except, again to quote from Peter, in his 
first Pentecostal sermon, He had been “
delivered by the determinate 
counsel and foreknowledge of God.” Behind that Cross I see the 
eternal Throne. In that Cross I see the action of the eternal authority. 
That which man has condemned and rebelled against is acting in the 
midst of all the ruin, created by his rebellion, for the recovery of man 
from those results ;
by the authority of God creating an opportunity 
for man to return to the Divine authority. That is what it always 
means. It is so wrong to think we become Christians to escape the 
bite of the fiery serpent, or hell fire. Yes, we do ;
but to become a 
Christian means we get back to God, yielding to the authority which 
has been contemned,
and against which man has rebelled. 

LIVING WATER 
That demands repentance, but it provides life, and healing for all 
who will be obedient to that command. 

“
There is life for a look at the Crucified One, 
There is life at this moment for thee. 
Then look, sinner, look unto Him and be saved ;
There is life in that moment for thee.” 

But there must be the look. There must be the bending of the neck. 

There must be the submission of the life to the authority of God 

There must be a return to the Throne of government which will be 

found to be the Throne of grace. We never know the grace until WC
submit to the government. “
As . . . so.
Notice carefully how this reads. “
As Moses lifted up the serpent, 

even so must
the Son of man be lifted up ;
that whosoever 
believeth 
may in Him have eternal life.” We are still on the earth 
level ?
No, we are going on to the heavenly level now. “
For God 
so loved the world that He gave His only begotten Son, that whosoever 
believeth on Him should not perish, but have eternal life. For 
God sent not His Son into the world to condemn the world ;
but that 
the world should be saved through Him.” A marvellous illustration, 
so simple, the historic incident, and yet so thrilling with
the fact of 
the Divine Dower and the Divine authoritv and the Divine grace. If 
man rebels, punishment must come ;
buieven
when he is &ffering,
God finds the remedy ;
and the Son of man given of God, and sent 
by God, is given in order that through that action of God and His Son, 
man may have life indeed. 

50.
Living Water 
John iv: 1-15
0 
0 
UR LORD used this illustration in circumstances widely different 
from those we have previously considered. We cannot help being 
arrested by those differences at the commencement. Jesus was not 
now in the city, but in the country, when this conversation took place, 
about a mile from Sychar. He was in Samaria,
not in Judaa,
and 
we hear Him talking, not to a ruler, the teacher of Israel, but to a 
woman, and withal, a sinning woman. 

The whole story is full of fascination, because of the remarkable 
things He said to this woman. The story is full of surprises, because 
He said to this woman, just as she was, things we could have imaginedHe would have reserved to say to far more advanced disciples. 

During the course of the things He said to this woman, He made 
use of this parabolic illustration of livirq
water. W
take our usunl
LIVING WATER 
after the flesh. He was face to face with a thirsty woman, and offered

Himself to her, as being able to quench that thirst, and that meant

able to lift her from the degradation into which she had fallen, able

to give her, who had become disillusioned, an entirely new outlook

upon life, able to come to the deep, scorching, burning, restless dis
satisfaction, and bring her complete satisfaction. That is what He 

was doing ;
and that is the subject ihustrated
by the living waters.

That is the great theme.

Jesus used this ihustration
of water. Following that method that

so characterized His teaching, taking something that was right there,

something under observation, something with which she had con
nection. He began by asking her for a drink of water ;
and when 

in surprise she said, How do You come to ask it of me, You a Jew, and

I a Samaritan, then He said this amazing thing to her, using the figure

of the water. Notice the word water occurs no less than eight times

in the course of the conversation. 

Water,-a great essential of human life. What are the thingsnecessary to life on the material level, the natural ? I will state them 
in the order of importance, from the least to the greatest. The first 
is food, that is the least important, but it is essential. We can certainlylive forty days without eating. It is interesting the occasions of fastingrecorded in the Bible for forty days. But more important than foodis water. How long can we live without water ?
Scientists tell us 
seven days, and no more. Of course the most important is breath.
How long can we live without breathing ?
I will
not attempt an 
answer ! 
We need to breathe, that is the first thing. We needwater, and we need food. But this illustration was taken there,
the second in importance as an element of life-water, that is thefigure.

Look at the figure. There is more than that in it ;
only I wouldremind you that thirst is a beneficent warning of danger. Thirst in 
its demand, is a search after deliverance from the danger. A man 
with no consciousness, no thirst for spiritual things, is in dire danger.
Thirst is beneficent. It is a warning, and it means a clamant cry forthat which will obviate the peril. It was not merely water in thisfigure of speech ;
it was the place of water. Notice how the well plays 
a part all
through here. Now for a small technicality, which is worthnoting. In the narrative there are two entirely different words, bothtranslated ze&l.
It is significant. Look at verses eleven and twelve. 
The woman is talking, and she says, “
The well
is deep .. .
our 
father Jacob, which gave us the well.
That was her thought andconception, which was perfectly true. That is the word @hear
which 
means a hole, or cistern. She was thinking of the accumulated waterthere in the well, in the cistern. Now look at verses six and fourteen. 
In the sixth verse John says, “ 
Jacob’s well was there.” That is not 
the same word, and John says “ 
Jesus sat thus by the well.” That 

252
PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

is not the word that the woman used on the other occasions. Go on 

to verse fourteen, Jesus is speaking, and He speaks of “
a well of 

water.” That is not the same word phear.
The difference is this, that

the word that John used in writing the narrative, even of the same

place of which the woman spoke as a cistern, John did not call it that.

He said, By the spring Jesus sat, by Jacob’s spring ;
and Jesus also 

used that word spring, when He said “
a well of water.” There are 

two words here in the figure of speech.

Our Lord then used the words that suggest not an accumulationof water in a hole, a well, in that sense, a cistern ;
but a spring. Take 
the other word in the figure of speech, as Jesus used it, “ 
living water.” 
What is living water ?
I am not thinking of the spiritual realm merely.
There was living water there in that sense, or that well would not havebeen in use after the long centuries. Jacob had given it to his sons.
There it was, an accumulation of water ;
someone drew out, and thecistern remained and filled up again, why ?
Because there was livingwater there. What then is living water, as distinct from cistern water?
It is water always flowing, as distinct from water gathered up, andkept. There is a beautiful phrase in the Old Testament on the materialor physical level, where we are told in the Book of Genesis that Isaac’s 
servants digged in the valley “
and found there a well of springingwater.” That is the same thought, living water, water always comingup, always passing on. We shall consider the figure again later on,
in another and wider application. Now we are simply looking atthe figure.

Living water is water always bubbling up and flowing, alwayscoming. Water in a glass by our side, is excellent, but it is not living 
water ;
it is stagnant, it is collected. Water ceases to be living whenit is gathered, and stored and kept. Jesus used that as a figure, living 
water ;
not the well in which there is an accumulation of water,
but a spring that keeps the well full, however much water is drawnfrom it. 

What a wonderful figure of speech, living water. Jesus is confronting 
a thirsty soul, and is using the illustration that is close athand. The woman called it a well. He spoke of a spring, of thatwhich had brought the water into the well. She had come far to draw 
the collected water. Lifting His illustration on to the realm of personality 
and the spiritual, He said to her that He could give her waterthat would be living water, water always coming, always springing,
living water, The whole thing is so patent, we need not stay longwith the teaching. Christ confronts man’s deepest need, his thirst.
That underlying consciousness of dissatisfaction expresses itself ina thousand ways. All the restless feverishness proves it ;
the failure 
of all things material to satisfy the deepest craving of the human soul.
That is thirst ;
and the world is crowded with thirsty souls. Howmany have tried so many things, but degradation has come, and 

LIVING WATER 

disillusionment has come, and dissatisfaction is abiding, a perpetual

irritant, a burning fever. They hardly know what it is they want.

There it is, all the restlessness of the age, of which jazz music is one

of the symptoms, restless, shivering of the body, symbolic ;
all the 

restless writhing of the spirit ; 
all man’s thirst. Man is wanting

something that he has not, and the utter failure of all attempts on

the earth level to satisfy that craving. The world is thirsty.

Now listen to Christ’s claim as made to that woman, and throughher as a representative to all humanity. “
If thou knewest the gift ofGod, and Who it is that saith to thee.” “
If thou knewest the gift ofGod,” what did He mean ? What is the gift of God ?
Living water?
Oh no. That is not what He meant then. That is His gift. Whatis the gift of God ? The same thought was in the mind of Jesus whenHe said to Nicodemus, “
God so loved the world that He gave Hisonly begotten Son.” Oh yes, “
If thou knewest the gift of God, andWho it is ”
;
God gave His Son. “
If thou knewest Who was speakingto thee, the One God has given His very Son, of His own nature andbeing.” “
If thou knewest thou wouldest ask of Him, and He wouldgive thee living water.”

Keep this on the spiritual level of the necessity of mankind. Our 
Lord was quoting freely the Jewish Scriptures of the Hebrew people.
Jeremiah had said, “
My people have committed two evils ;
they haveforsaken Me the fountain of living waters ;
and hewed them out 
cisterns, broken cisterns, that can hold no water.” And later he said,
”
0 Lord, the Hope of Israel ;
all that forsake Thee shal1
be ashamed ;
they that depart from Me shall be written in the earth, because theyhave forsaken the Lord, the fountain of living waters.” And yetone other instance, this time from Zechariah. “
It shall come to passin that day, that Iiving waters shall come out fromJerusaIem
;
haIf
of them towards the eastern sea, and half of them towards the western 
sea ;
in summer and in winter shall it be.” Living waters !
It was 
an old figure of speech from the Hebrew prophets, and these livingwaters were waters that proceeded from God, and when men turnedtheir back upon living waters and made cisterns, they found they werebroken, and yielded no water.

Jesus said to this woman with that great Hebrew figure of speech,
living waters, unquestionably in mind, If you had known the gift ofGod, you would have asked of Me, and I would have given you livingwater, that which shall completely quench thirst, so that you wouldnever be thirsty. But those living waters shall be in you, springingwithin you, springing ,up,
a beautiful word. I am often inclined to 
change the translation, not to improve it, but to help in understandingit. The word translated springing up means leaping up. The wordonly occurs here, and twice in Acts (iii. 8 and xiv. IO) when it tells 
of the lame man at the Beautiful Gate leaping. It is a figure of joyand gladness, leaping up. Springing up, yes, bubbling up, perennially 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

full and fresh ;
laughing up. That is what He is prepared to give to 
humanity. That is what He can give to the human soul thirsty, 
parched, feverish, distracted, disappointed ;
water that will be not 
outside, stored in a cistern, but in him a spring in himself, leaping up, 
bubbling up, springing up unto eternal life. 

The story goes on. We know how it ends. What has the story 
to say to us ?
The challenge of Jesus abides, and the promise of Jesus 
abides. “ 
If thou knewest Who it is.” There is so much there. Half 
the trouble to-day is half the people do not know Who Jesus is. The 
moment He is made anything less than what the New Testament 
reveals Him to be, the Son of God, and God the Son, well, we shall not 
know Who He is, and we shall not ask Him for living water, and we 
shall try and satisfy ourselves in other ways, it may be in religious 
ways. People have gone up to Keswick year after year, to get filled 
up. Poor souls. Whatever they get will become stagnant before they 
leave Keswick. Oh no, we cannot get it that way. 

“
I tried the broken cisterns, Lord, 
But ah !
the waters failed 1
E’en as I stooped to drink, they’d Aed,
And mocked me as I wailed !
”
Jesus is challenging us, ”
If thou knewest !
”
Do we know ? Then 
we ask, and He will give the living water so that we shall be able to 
say, 
“
I heard the voice of Jesus say,
Behold, I freely giveThe living water, thirsty one, 
Stoop down and drink, and live. 

I came to Jesus, and I drank 

Of that life-giving stream ;
My thirst was quenched, my soul revived, 

And now I Iive in Him.” 

51.
The Lamp of Prophecy 
John v: 35 

HIS is a. very remarkable parabolic illustration used by our Lord.TThe subject as announced, is intentional, for it marks the truetheme and value, the lamp of prophecy. Peter described “
the word 
of prophecy ”
as “
a lamp shining in a dark place.” 

John was more than a prophet. We have our Lord’s warrant for 
that statement. Said He to the people, “
Wherefore went ye out ?
to 

THE LAMP OF PROPHECY 

see a prophet ?
Yea, I say unto you, and much more than a
prophet.
This is he of whom it is written, 

Behold, I send My messenger before Thy face,
Who shall prepare Thy way before Thee.” 

So in that sense he was more than a prophet.

But he was distinctly a prophet, perfectly fulfilling in his publicministry, the prophetic office. We remember that Peter said on another 
occasion “
To Him ”
that is to Christ, “ 
give all the prophets witness.”
If that applies, as verily it does to all the prophets, the record of whoseministry and whose words we find in our Old Testament, it is perfectlytrue that all their prophesying found culmination in the ministry ofJohn. He was the last CF
t+
low 
line of the Hebrew prophets, comingafter a silence of four hundred years during
wluch
no authentic prophetic 
voice had been heard, Malachi having been the last. Yet in 
his message he gathered up all the foretelling, all the hopes and allthe aspirations of those prophets who had given witness to theChrist. He was the forerunner, the immediate forerunner of theChrist, and therefore the culminating word of the long line ofprophets.

In this way this illustration of our Lord applied specifically to him;
” 
he was the lamp that burneth and shineth.” We follow our usual 
custom and consider three matters. We enquire, What was the subjectillustrated by our Lord. Then we will examine the figure itself, in 
order that we may deduce the abiding teaching.

Let it be said first of all that these words of verse thirty-five maybe taken as parenthetical. By that I do not suggest that they areunimportant. He had been talking about John and at that pointHe said of him, “ 
He was the lamp that burneth and shineth.” What 
then was the occasion ? What lies round about that statement ?
What had led our Lord to speak of John ?
It was a great occasionwhen He made a claim which the rulers understood in one way ;
when 
they had challenged Him as to His right to heal on the Sabbath dayand make a man carry his mattress on the Sabbath day, He had madeuse of those tremendous words, “
My Father worketh even until now, 
and I work.” We are not considering their value in their setting, saveto refer to it. They said He had made a man break Sabbath when Hehad restored a man to power to keep the Sabbath. When they saidin effect, He was making a man break the Sabbath, He said, againin effect, God has no Sabbath while man suffers. What they understood 
Him to do was to make Himself equal with God, when He said“
My Father worketh ... and I work.” They were quite right, butit stirred their anger, and they fain would have killed Him on whatthey conceived to be the ground of His blasphemy in making Himself 
equal with God.

Following that, we have His discourse, this wonderful message 

256
PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

that He bore to them on His authority, on His relationship with God, 

on the fact that He was speaking by Divine authority, thus vindicating 

the claim He had made of being on an equality with God ;
and He 

sternly rebuked their unbelief. In the midst of this He referred to 

John. That then is where these words occur. John’s ministry was 

well-known. The whole countryside had been influenced by it, and 

these men had gone with the multitudes to hear him. Jesus reminded 

them of that. 

They had sent to John, and he had told them. Moreover, they had 

rejoiced for a season in his ministry, in his light. Having said that 

to them, He pointed out to them how John His forerunner had borne 

witness to the truth when he had proclaimed Him. He reminded

them they had listened for a while to John,
and had rejoiced, and 

almost in an aside, He said of John, “
He was the lamp that bumeth 

and shineth.” 

So with all our knowledge of the ministry of John in mind, and 

our recognition of the fact that he fulfilled the prophetic office, and of 

what our Lord said of him, which was equally true, that of all who 

had exercised that office
of the past, and of all who were to be called 

upon to exercise that office
in coming days, here is the description of 

the prophetic office, “ 
a burning and a shining lamp.” 

We come now to consider the figure in its deepest values. What 
was
this figure Jesus used ?
The lamp. Scholars are all agreed in what 
may not be quite patent to the ordinary reader, that when Jesus 
used that word “ 
the lamp,” not a lamp, although that might quite 
well have been said, there was a great definiteness in it. So careful 
a scholar as Westcott emphasizes the fact that Jesus was taking 
something quite familiar to them, that which they could see in any 
house ;
that the definite article, “ 
the lamp,” points to the familiar 
household object. That is the figure, that of the Iamp
burning. Our 
minds go wandering there helpfully. We remember that Jesus said, 
No man lights a lamp, or a candle, the same word, and puts it 
under a bushel There He took the same figure. It is the ordinary, 
everyday figure of the lamp, shining in the house, and giving 
light. 

Look at that lamp for a moment. We recognize first that it has 
no light in itself, but it is a centre of light, when the illuminating 
essence is supplied, and ignition takes place. It is always so. It is so 
even to-day with the lights round about us. It is very remarkable 
how underlying principles do not change. Of course when Jesus was 
talking the lamp was the light, with the wick and oil. I am old enough 
to remember that was the illumination in my home in boyhood, just 
a lamp, with wick and oil. But that lamp never lighted the house. 
Then I am still old enough to remember when the lamp was superseded 
by gas. They put in all the fittings, and some of them were 
fearfully and wonderfully made, brackets on the walls and chandeliers. 

THE LAMP OF PROPHECY 

But look at them, there is no light. The bracket and the burner 

give no light. Now the very homes who used that method, have 

electric light, and no one knows exactly what it is. What do we do ?
We wire our buildings, and put in fixtures, and bulbs, or something 

else, but there is no light in them. The lamps do not light the building. 

The light comes when some illuminating essence is supplied, and 

ignition takes place. In the old days ignition took place with the 

tinder box. The tinder was struck on flint until a spark smouldered, 

and you blew it, and touched the wick with it, and by that fire it 

became a centre of light. It is the same with the gas burner. The 

tap was turned on, and it was touched with fire, and the room was lit, 

the house was lit. Now we have gone beyond all that. We do not 

have to touch anything with fire ourselves. We do not have to put 

a match to the gas burner, but we just press a lever, and there is a 

flash somewhere of fire, and there is light. But there is no light in the 

lamp, gas burner, or bulb. Something more is wanted.

Still look at the lamp. What brings the light ?
Burning, always 

burning, always fire. There is no light apart from fire, from the sun 

to the wax vesta
there must be burning. Burning in the case of the 

lamp with the wick and the oil, burning always means consuming. 

While it bums it is being consumed, and by the consuming of the oil, 

touched with fire upon the basis of the wick, light is given, and it is 

not consumed. If that consuming process fails, if it becomes over
charged with charcoal, or fails to supply the oil, the light is snuffed 

out. We must have burning, and burning means consuming. What
ever we see in a lamp is transitory. It is not going on all the time.

Presently it will consume by itself, burning ;
and out goes the burning,

shining. 

But because burning, shining, and so illuminating, and always 
-by
the process of burning. That was our Lord’s figure. Said He of 
John “
He was the lamp that burneth vd 
shineth.” I would venture 
to suggest the introduction of a little word there. “
He was the lamp 
that burneth and so shineth.” There is no shining without burning ;
and any burning that does not issue in shining falls back into 
ashes, and the light ceases. John was the lamp that burned and 
shined. 

The teaching deduced is so simple and on the surface that we 
do not tarry with it. Take it in the case of John. The greatness of 
his work, and the marvel of it, was not something done out of himself, 
but through himself, and all the influence he exerted in that marvellous
ministry as the forerunner of Jesus was not the result of anything 
in himself. It was the result of an oil that was there, supplied to 
him, Here without being fanciful at all I take the figure employed 
in the Old Testament as the figure of the Holy Spirit. Yes, what a 
great work he did, what a marvellous work ;
but a work which was 
consuming, and therefore transitory, and must presently find its end. 

17
253
PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

It did find its end. I am using the word in its true and beautiful 
sense. He burnt himself out into the essential light ;
and there was 
the greatness of his word at the end ;
“
He must increase ... I must 
decrease.” Yes, he decreased ;
but Jesus our Lord tells us how he 
was burning, and therefore shining. That is the true function of the 
prophet. 

It has been the function of the prophet in every age. Go back 
through the history of these marvellous prophets, those we call mistakenly 
major and minor, the prophetic utterances, and it is true that 
they were never self-luminous. Their light was derivative. We hear 
them again and again as we study them saying, “ 
Thus saith the Lord,” 
and they were shining. They were lights in dark places ;
and indeed, 
the prophetic ministry is always characterized by darkness round 
about it. Apart from the darkness there is no call for the prophetic 
ministry. The prophet is always shining in a dark place ;
but he is 
shining because he is burning. He is being consumed, and in the 
consuming process light is shining and flashing everywhere. “
To Him 
bare all the prophets witness.” What high honour, and what grave 
responsibility. It is the responsibility of a lamp well trimmed, supplied 
with oil, burning ;
and there responsibility ends. The issue of the 
fulfilment
of such responsibility in the prophetic office is always 
shining, the scattering of light upon the darkness. 

In a familiar passage Peter said on the day of Pentecost, quoting 
one of those old Hebrew prophets, Joel, 

“
And it shall be in the last days, saith God,
I will pour forth of My Spirit upon all flesh;
And your sons
and your daughters shall prophesy,
And your young men shall see visions,
And your old men shall dream dreams ;
Yea and on My bond-servants and on My bond-maidens in those daysWill I pour forth of My Spirit ;
and they shall prophesy.” 

The gift of prophecy will fall upon all. That is what Joel foretold. 
That is what Peter claimed to be fulfilled. There was a day when men 
ran unto Moses and complained that certain were exercising a prophetic 
gift that were not as was supposed-to use a phrase not Biblical 
but modem-in regular orders. You remember what Moses said. 
“ 
Would God that all the Lord’s people were prophets.” The centuries 
ran on and on, and the prophetic gift was being exercised to Malachi’s 
time ;
and then silence for four hundred years, reborn in John ;
fulfilled in Jesus to the very ultimate limit of all truth, caught up by 
those whom He called and trained. And on the day of Pentecost the 
Spirit fell upon the whole assembly, not upon Peter and James and 
John and the twelve alone, but upon the sons and daughters, upon 
the bond-slaves and bond-maidens ;
and they were all prophesying. 
That is the great ideal. 

THE BREAD OF LIFE 

How terribly we have lost it. But the fact remains. There isno Christian man or woman, a child of God by the marvel and super
natural wonder of the new birth, but is called to prophecy. Prophecyis infinitely more than prediction. That is the smallest element in 
prophecy. It is forthtelling, it is the proclamation of the way andwill of God about the past and the present, as well as about the future,
and we are all called upon to be prophets. If we are to fulfil
the 
prophetic office in any measure, we must be lamps burning, and soshining. We are lamps, no light in us, or of ourselves. The lamp maybe very ornate, and the gas fitting very beautiful, and the electricfitting may be very charming ;
but they are no good in themselves.
There must be the communication of the element of light, touchedby fire into radiance ;
then the burning and the shining, a lamp ina dark place. 

52. The Bread of Life 
John vi :
35-58 

T
T
HE VERSES thirty-five to fifty-one of this chapter in John arereally not adequate. At least the first
fifty-nine verses are required. 
It is pre-eminently a chapter about bread. The Greek wordados
occurs some twenty-one times. In verses eleven, thirteen, andtwenty-six the rendering “
loaves ”
is a translation of the same word. 
That is simply a mechanical statement of the fact stamping the natureof the chapter. All the vastness of the teaching given and impliedis beyond the purpose or possibility of this study. In our next studywe shall return to it, considering the figures of flesh and blood. This 
subject of bread is related to that, for this is one great discourse.
We are now concerned with the parabolic illustration of bread, of“ 
the bread of life,” which Jesus used upon this occasion. Taking ourusual method, what was the subject which He illustrated ;
secondly,
what was the figure He employed ;
and consequently, what is theteaching to be deduced from that meditation?
It is always important to know what our Lord was intending toillustrate or illuminate. We bear in mind that bread had brought thecrowd together. The day before they had been supernaturally fedwith bread, literal, physical bread. The lad with the five loaves and 
the two small fishes had been there ;
and Jesus had taken those five 
loaves and had blessed them, and broken them, and multiplied them. 
‘
spring-time when He blessed the bread,
‘Twas harvest when He brake.” 
So they had been fed. Because they had been supernaturally fed onthe previous day, the crowds had come together. That is what brought 

260 PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

them back. We are not unfair to them in saying that, because Jesus

said to them, in verse twenty-six, “
Ye seek Me, not because ye saw

signs, but because ye ate of the loaves, and were filled.” They ate

loaves yesterday, and they had come back to-day. Whereas it does

not say so in so many words, they hoped for another manifestation

of power. They did not take any cognizance of the sign it was intended

to signify.

It was with this attitude Jesus was dealing when He made use of

this figure of speech. He said to them (v. 27) I
Work not for the 

meat which perisheth, but for the meat which abideth unto eternal

life, which the Son of man shall give unto you :
for Him the Father,

even God, hath sealed.” So He rebuked their materialism of effort. 

Do not work for the meat which perishes. They had worked, some of 

them, pretty hard, in the hope of a meal that day. They had gone

all round the lake. They had put out a good deal of effort to get there,

to find Him. They did not want to understand. They were not

seeking for interpretation. The sign did not appeal to them. The

thing that brought them there was the fact of their full bellies

yesterday. He rebuked that, and called them to another kind

of effort, of output, of strength that resulted in the meat that

did not perish, that would bring them to the place of meat that

endureth to eternal Iife. That is the subject which our Lord was

illustrating.

Now look at the figure in itself, bread, the bread of life. We arenot touching the spiritual level yet ;
though in dealing with the figure,
of course, we begin to see into the spiritual significance. Stay, however,
with the figure. The bread of life was a common phrase. In versetwenty-seven He referred to “
meat.” Here He referred to bread,
“
the bread of life.” Meat, of course, was the familiar word,brosis,
which means food. It does not mean flesh, but all sorts of food. Do 
not put out your energy to obtain the food that perishes ;
but putout your energy to obtain the food that sustains the life which iseternal. 

What was the meaning of this word bread ?
In that Eastern 
country in those times, and very Iargely
to-day in thatparticmar
neighbourhood, bread as we understand it, made of meal, is primaryfood. It is always considered so. All other articles of food were looked 
upon as accessory ;
permissible, but unnecessary. Bread was theprincipal food, and was looked upon then as having a sanctity all itsown. Go to the East to-day, and it will be found whether amongArabs, Jews, or other members of that land, they never tread underfoot a piece of bread. However soiled it is, however smirched orcontaminated, they never put their foot on it. An Arab walking downone of the highways, seeing a piece of bread would be careful not toput his foot on it. He would be careful to pick it up, and put it in aniche in the wall for the pariahs. The reason is because there is still 

THE BREAD OF LIFE 
a great and peculiar sense of the element of sacredness in bread,
because it comes from God. That is true of the East, where Jesuswas speaking, and of the thinking of the people to whom He wasspeaking. Bread stood for necessary food.

In Genesis iii. IO we find it said, “
In the sweat of thy face shalt 
thou eat bread.” That did not merely mean an article of food made 
out of barley or wheat meal ;
but it meant food ;
and from there 
all the way through the word bread refers to food generally.
So it does here. The emphasis is laid upon that peculiar foodwhich was the general source of sustenance in the East.Its
sanctity was always remembered, because of its symbolism in theEast. 

Bread always stood for hospitality and for fellowship ;
and men 
in the East broke bread with one another, the one providing it offeringhospitality, and those partaking, were united in fellowship. While we 
are not yet dealing with the spiritual things, they are shining through.
Our Lord used a figure of speech. They had referred to the manna,
and He had taken it up and dealt with food.

Again, “
bread of life ”
;
and still staying in the realm of the figure,
what is this ?
What is the word for life there ?
It is the Greek word 
zoe, not pneuma,
spirit ;
not $wuche,
the mind, but zoe, that is, the 
vital principle ;
life reduced to its simplest terms, and to its simplestfact. We read “ 
eternal life,” and the word is always the same,zoe.
Here is a wonderful fact that in the teaching of our Lord, and thatof all His apostles, they took hold of the word zoe and lifted it on toa higher plane than it then occupied in the thinking of men. TheGreek word meant life, human life, as well as the life of the lion,
and of the mouse. That is the word here, “
the bread of life ”
;
the 
vital principle in our human race, which constitutes the race as differentiated 
from races. We talk about the Anglo-Saxon race. Wheredid we really come from ?
Many races are represented here. Forthe time being we call ourselves British so as to cover all the English,
Scotch, Welsh, and Irish. That is a race. Cross the Channel, and 
we find races, and they are very different ;
but the differences 
are all physical or mental, not spiritual. The vital principle isthe same, whether Teuton, or Aryan, or Semitic, or what-not!
The bread of life is its sustenance, which maintains the lifeprinciple.

It is wonderful how we can change and reduce some of the thingsat which we have been looking to-day. Food, what are the things wereally need ? Protein, carbohydrate, fat. In recent years we haveadded another-vitamins. We never heard of these when I was young,
but they were still there, and they were very important in the formingof bone. The figure our Lord used was the bread of life, food, thatsustains vitality.

Our Lord said, “
I 
am the Bread of life,” and the claim is very 

262 PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

significant, being the first of the great “ 
I ams ” 
that John has recorded 
for us. There are eight occasions upon which our Lord took the greatname of God as revealed to Moses at the burning bush. Then, asthough the revelation could not be made, it had recoiled upon itself,
and reasserted itself in august and dreadful majesty, “
I AM, THAT I 
AM." So God spake to Moses. He had asked, “
Tell me, what is Thyname ? ”
For many years the great declaration was left in all itsmajestic splendour ;
and Jesus came and took hold of it, and linked 
it to simple symbols that men might understand. This is the first,
“ 
I am the Bread of life.” 

The figure, too, is interesting in relation to the necessities of life.
When considering the subject of the living water we said that thethree essential things to life were breath, water, and food. A mancan live forty days without food ;
and about seven days without water.
He cannot live seven minutes without breath. John in bringing thestory before us has led us over the ground in which we have seen Himmeeting these essentials. In the third chapter, when talking toNicodemus, He spoke of breath. The wind bloweth where it listeth. 
So the Spirit. In chapter four He made the promise to the womanof water, living water, springing up. Now here we reach food, absolutely 
essential to life. We come along the line of illustration by thatgradation-breath, water, food.

Necessarily therefore, having looked at the figure, we are boundto face the essential teaching. When Jesus said, “
I am the Bread of 
life,” He was facing the hunger of man in his essential life, which isnot physical, which is not mental, but which is spiritual. Human life 
is essentially spiritual. Do not take that word spiritual and make itmean good and holy and true. It does not necessarily mean anythingof the kind. It refers to essential nature. It may be false and untruein its activities ;
but the essence of human Iife is spirit. To quoteonce more. When Paul was on Mars’ Hill he said God had made 
of one every nation to dwell upon the face of the earth. We have the 
word there, “ 
one blood.” That is perfectly true. Submitted to 
chemical analysis, there is no difference between the blood of the negroand the blood of the white man. But Paul did not say that. Theessential oneness of humanity is not in its blood, nor
in its mentality,
but in its spiritual nature. Get down underneath the physical, theglorious sacramental method of revealing the spirit, and receiving inthe spiritual consciousness ;
and get underneath the mental, the processes 
of thought ;
what is it that is thinking, or doing, that looksthrough the eyes, and listens through the ears ?
The spiritual thing;
and that is what Christ is speaking of. He is addressing the hungerthat lies in the human heart. 

This great theme cannot be dealt with adequately. It can onlybe done suggestively. Is man hungry to-day, in his deepest life ?
He 
is, and there are three great proofs of that hunger. 

THE BREAD OF LIFE 

The first is the quest for God ;
the second is the search for man ;
and the third is the struggle against sin. These things are universal. 
They are not confined to one race ;
they are racial. 

The quest for God is universal. All idolatries witness to the fact 
that the human heart is feeling after and knowing God. The human 
search for man is equally a revelation of human hunger. Man’s quest 
for individuality, personality in its perfection and realization. So 
many of these eternal truths are sobbing and sighing through the 
writings of men, and the thinkings of men, without their understanding 
them. AI1
the struggle we read about, all the attempts, all the high 
aspirations to make men fit. What do we mean by being fit ?
Think 
it through, this quest of men for fitness, and the quest for man in his 
social relationships and international relationships. First the quest 
for God, and then the search for man ;
and always, resultantly, the 
struggle against sin. We may change the word if we will. Struggle 
against failure, against imperfection ;
the consciousness that we have 
missed the mark ;
that is the word for sin in the New Testament. 
Humanity everywhere is missing the mark, and man everywhere is 
against it. I am not talking about his folly, his foolishness, his wickedness, 
his rebellion. I am speaking of his hunger, and that hunger 
proves his quest for God, his search for man, and his struggle against 
sin. 

But hunger is not bread, though it declares the need for it. Therefore 
hunger never becomes bread. The quest for God never means 
the finding of God. The search for man never means the realization of 
the meaning of humanity. The struggle against sin never brings victory 
over it. Hunger never becomes bread, Unless bread be found, hungerissues in death, inevitably and invariably. Christ stood confronting 
all this, and He said, “ 
I am the Bread of life,” a statement of august 
majesty ;
“
I 
am the living bread,” I am the bread that has come 
down out of heaven for men. 

Think for a moment, what does He do ?
Man is engaged in the 
quest for God, Christ reveals God. Man is engaged in a search after 
man. He interprets man, and shows man what man really is. Man 
in rebellion against sin, failure, whatever he calls it, struggling against 
sin, He comes to save from sin, to break its power, wipe out its pollution, 
and the profound reason why, He is the bread of life. God is 
seen confronting humanity, and bringing within its reach that which 
shall satisfy all its hunger, end its quest in victory ;
answer its search 
in a perfect revelation, and deliver it from its paralysis and pollution 
in sin and power. So Christ says, “ 
I am the Bread of life.” 

We are Christian man and women. Do we believe that ?
Have 
we proved it ?
Do we know that He is the Bread of life to our souls ? 
Can we truthfully say, 

“
Thou, 0 Christ, art all I want.” 

264
PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

All hunger satisfied, God found, man interpreted, sin mastered ?
If 
we can, then keep the discourse in connection with the physical miracle,
and do not forget that when Jesus fed those people, how He had done

it. He had asked and had obtained bread from a lad, through Hisdisciples ;
and He had said to those disciples, in the presence of thathungry crowd, physically, “ 
Give ye them to eat.” They brought toHim what they had, which was absolutely inadequate to meet the needof the hungry crowd. He took it. He blessed it. He brake it. Theycarried it. So the hungry crowds were fed. He is still saying, “
I am 
the Bread of life,” “ 
Give ye them to eat.” 

53. Flesh and Blood 
John vi :
53-58
0 
0 
UR LORD'S use of the terms “
flesh and blood ”
in parabolic illustration 
is admittedly startling. So it appeared to many of Hisdisciples at the time. John tells us that “
Many therefore of Hisdisciples when they heard this, said, This is a hard saying, who canhear it ?
”
The word “
hard ”
there had a very definite significance,
which is hardly conveyed by our translation. The Greek word skleros
means rough, in the sense of being objectionable. We really get nearerto what the disciples said if we substitute that word. “
This is an 
objectionable saying, who can hear it ?”
Moreover the use of the figure was divisive. It created a crisis.
It was a climax definitely in the course of our Lord’s ministry. Aswe have said, John records, “
Upon this many of His disciples wentback, and walked no more with Him.” It is quite evident that whatHe said was of a very startling nature, greatly mystifying those whoheard it, and even His disciples, listening very much upon the surfaceof things, said, This is too much, this is a hard saying ;
this is a roughsaying. This looks foolish. Indeed they were so much offended, manyof them, that they went back, never to return to Him. It was a divisive 
word. 

To us also it does remain a startling illustration. While not entering 
into any controversy such as had gathered around this saying ofJesus, suffice it for us to dismiss the idea that this saying of our Lordhas anything to do with what we call the Holy Communion. Ithas been applied in that way largely by certain theologians of whomwe speak with respect, but from whom we profoundly differ. OurLord was not referring to the Communion here at all, not even in 
a secondary sense. But seeing that a great deal of controversy haswaged around this saying through the running years of theologicalconsideration, at least it behoves us to consider this carefully, and 

FLESH AND BLOOD 2%
pray for the help of the Spirit to an understanding of what our Lord 

really meant.

So, taking our usual method, we consider first, what was the subject

He intended to illustrate, for it was an illustration. Secondly, we pause

with the figure itself, which He employed. Necessarily therefore from

that consideration of the subject and figure we proceed to deduce the

teaching which He gave.

What was the occasion upon which our Lord made use of these

figures ?
They were connected with the discussion which has run

through this sixth chapter on the subject of bread. We have con
sidered that wonderful figure of speech, “ 
the bread of life,” and that 

Christ claimed He was the Bread of life. This follows on directly.

The bread of life is the sustenance of life, the food of life ;
and 

Christ said He was that bread. Now, therefore, whatever He 

says about flesh and blood here, He said in close connection

with that subject of bread, and must be concerned with the

same theme, that, namely, of the sustenance of life. So much for

the occasion. 

What was He illustrating ?
Again we can gather into a brief

sentence the answer to that enquiry. The intended revelation of the 

flesh and blood was that of how man could partake of the living bread,

“ 
I am the bread of life,” “
I am the living bread which came down

out of heaven ;
if any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever;
yea and the bread which I will give is My flesh, for the life of the

world.” How can men receive that bread of life ?
By eating His

flesh and drinking His blood.

That brings us at once to the figure. Once again we admit thestartling nature of it. Let us pause with it as a figure of speech merely,
flesh and blood. 

The word employed for flesh here is a very familiar one to readersof the New Testament Greek, the word sarx.
It is used in differingways and forms ;
and it caught a distinctly theological sense, andwas used oftentimes in that way by the apostles, by Paul especiallyin his writings. But get behind all that to the word. What is theflesh ?
It is the material side of personality, the body as differentiatedfrom the spirit. Yet when that body is dead it is no longer flesh.
Flesh demands that life be there ;
but it is pre-eminently personalityembodied-flesh. 

What is the significance of blood ?
However much the disciplesmay have been shocked as they listened to our Lord, we all knowthe sanctity of blood according to the whole of the Hebrew teachingunder which the disciples had been brought up. We can summarize 
it all in one word, simple, sublime, and final, in the Old Testament;
” 
the blood is the life.” We are still in the realm of the body, and yetthe blood, in its mysterious and mighty work within the body, is theelement of life. Have we anything the matter with us ? It can be 

266 PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

diagnosed quite simply, our blood is not acting properly, there is some 
clot or hindrance. The blood is the life. It is also material, on this 
level ;
the flesh and blood. 

But now notice another thing. We must get back into the atmosphere 
of the time. The separation of one from the other in this 
statement implies death. If the blood be taken away from the flesh, 
that means death, always. I 
My flesh, My blood.” Mark well the 
inevitable strangeness of this statement of Jesus to listening Jews ;
and for us immediately it is evident that we cannot stay in the realm 
of the figure. We cannot go any farther in that direction, and we must 
immediately seek the spiritual intention that Jesus had. I am warranted 
in saying that because of what He said to these very disciples. 
When they said it was a hard saying, He told them, ‘
It is the spirit 
that quickeneth ;
the flesh profiteth nothing ;
the words that I have 
spoken unto you are spirit, and are life.” The true sustenance of life 
is flesh. He said that is “
meat indeed,” that is truly food. His blood 
is “ 
drink indeed,” that is, truly drink. Remembering the words He 
uttered are spirit, He is dealing with the essential nature of man, the 
essential hunger of man ;
with the essential necessity of man as to 
sustenance is true spiritual life. He has used figures in the realm of 
the material. He passes from that at once and says the flesh profits 
nothing, that He had spoken of the spirit ;
that they had to do with 
the essential life of the spirit. 

Then He used the figure, “ 
My flesh.” How may we reverently 
interpret that word ?
I do so by going back to the beginning of the 
Gospel, and looking once more at that marvellous prologue that John 
wrote. “ 
The Word became flesh.” “
He that eateth My flesh ”
;
and 
the spiritual intention must inevitably be that He was referring to the 
whole fact of His incarnation, as placed at the disposal of humanity ;
the bread that will meet that hunger and satisfy their need ;
the eating 
of His flesh. 

Then “ 
His blood,” necessarily as shed, necessarily as given up ;
and consequently as life liberated through death. Again He used a 
figure that shocked His disciples. They said it was rough, objectionable. 
But He had taken that figure, ”
Eat the flesh of the Son of man, 
and drink His blood.” I will dare to put it in another form. He that 
appropriates for himself My nature, the nature which is here because 
God is incarnate, and the Word has become flesh, he that appropriates 
that nature ;
he that drinks of My blood, is he that appropriates the 
value coming through the fact that the blood was shed, the value of 
atonement and redemption. “
He that eateth My flesh and drinketh 
My blood.” 

Listen to Paul. He was writing to the Galatians. “
I have been 
crucified with Christ ;
yet I live ;
and yet no longer I, but Christ 
liveth in me ;
and that life which I now live in the flesh I live in faith, 
the faith which is in the Son of God, Who loved me, and gave Himself 

FLESH AND BLOOD 
up for me.” Once more let us take those words of Paul, not attempt
ing to improve upon them, for that cannot be, but let us take them 

in this sense. I have eaten of the flesh of the Lord Christ. I have 

become a partaker of His nature. The very life I now live, I live in 

faith. It is His life in me, dominant, regnant.
I have appropriated 

the wonder and the mystery of the incarnation by faith in Him. 

Whatever there is in His life of purity, of holiness, of excellence, of 

beauty is mine. 

The apostle was not claiming he was fully realizing it, because 

when he wrote to the Philippians he said, I have not yet attained, I 

am not perfect ;
but one thing I do, I press towards the mark of the 

prize of the high calling, whatever the attainment. There was the 

possession of the very nature of Christ. He had eaten of the flesh. 

He had partaken of the incarnation, and he was hungry no more, and 

the element of life was there. But he had also appropriated the value 

of His death, and that means first of all the cessation of all attempt 

at self-culture. Is not the Church of God losing sight of that to-day ?
On every hand to-day we are called to be Christians on the ground 

of seeking self-culture ;
and we are not accepting our relationship to 

Christ as a gift of grace at the foot of the Cross, the bestowment that 

comes to us, that can only come through the shedding of the blood of 

the Son of God. 

Yet that is what Paul meant ;
and in the Philippian letter he also 

said, “ 
For to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain.” 

These are figures of speech, so startling that the disciples, many 
of them, said they were hard, rough, and uncouth ;
figures of speech 
which immediately merge into the infinite realm, upon the wonder 
of the incarnation by which God can and has put at the disposal of 
sinning, failing, ruined man a power, not merely a pattern, but a 
power ;
and through death and the shedding of blood has put at 
the disposal of man burdened, a pardon and a cleansing, as well 
as a power. 

So he that eats of the flesh, and drinks of the blood, he is a 
partaker of the nature of Christ in incarnation, which includes the 
Deity as well as the humanity ;
that is what Peter meant when he 
said we are made partakers of the Divine nature. He who has reposed 
his trust in Him, and received that, has eaten of His flesh ;
and he 
that reposes his trust in the mystery of Christ’s shed blood has 
drunk of His blood ;
and that is meat indeed, and that is drink 
indeed. 

When Paul was writing to the Corinthians he said something in 
this connection. “
And He died for all, that they which live should 
no longer live unto themselves, but unto Him Who for their sakes 
died and rose again. Wherefore we henceforth know no man after 
the flesh.” And then the amazing thing, “
Even though we have known 
Christ after the flesh, yet now we know Him so no more.” Through 

268 PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

the figure we have entered into the fact. Through that which brought

Him into the presence of humanity familiarly for a generation, or for

only three years perchance in public ministry, through that we have

entered into fellowship with Him in the deepest things of His nature.

“
Wherefore if any man is in Christ, he is a new creation ;
the old 

things are passed away ;
behold, they are become new.”

So we go back and end with these words of our Lord spoken on

that occasion, resolutely determined to keep them close to this whole

chapter, and to interpret the figures by the great statement. “
It is 

the spirit that quickeneth ;
the flesh profiteth nothing ;
the words 

that I have spoken unto you are spirit, and are life.” In the realm

of our spiritual nature, if we trust Him, believe in Him, yield to Him,

we are made partakers of His nature, we eat His flesh, and we appro
priate all the mystery of His atonement, symbolized by the shedding

of blood ;
and we drink His blood. 

54. Rivers 
John vii : 37-39
HE PARABOLIC illustration upon which our attention is fixed nowTis that of “
rivers.” Those of “
thirst ”
and “
living water” havealready come under review in the story of the Samaritan woman inthe fourth chapter. Necessarily, however, we must bear these in mindas they recur in this passage, for they have distinct bearing upon thepresent study of “ 
rivers.” For the quenching of thirst by living water,
the supply is referred to here by our Lord under the figure of rivers.
It will at once be recognized that rivers suggest plentifulness ;
not a 
running brook, not even a river, but rivers. Such was the figure whichour Lord employed.

Following our regular custom, we ask first, what was the subject ourLord was intending to illustrate when He used the figure ?
Secondly,
what is this figure ?
How are we to understand it as a figure ?
Necessarily 
from those two lines of preliminary thought, we consider thegreat teaching.

Here we are face to face with something perhaps a little unusual,
and yet full of value. In other considerations we have had to enquirewhat was our Lord intending to illustrate by the use of that particularfigure. In this case we have no need to ask that question. We arein no doubt in this case, because this figure of speech was immediatelyfollowed in the narrative of John by exposition. This is stated in 
verse thirty-nine, “
This spake He of the Spirit, which they that believedon Him were to receive ;
for the Spirit was not yet given ;
because 
Jesus was not yet glorified.” 

RIVERS 269
This is an arresting fact. Here we find our Lord saying, “
If any

man thirst, let him come unto Me, and drink. He that believeth on 

Me, as the scripture hath said, out of his belly shah
flow rivers of 

living water.” There we have our figure of rivers of living water. Well, 

what did He mean ? “This spake He of the Spirit .
.. for the Spirit

was not yet given.” In the MSS. there is no word following “ 
yet.”

Nothing perhaps can be better than the word that has been supplied

by our translators ;
for the word “
given ”
is for our English under
standing. But the text says, “ 
The Spirit was not yet,” and evidentIy
the reference was to the Spirit in all His fulness. So the added word 

helps us. “
The Spirit was not yet given ”
;
because Jesus was not 

yet glorified. That was His subject, in the light of that inspired inter
pretation of the Purpose
of the illustration. He was speaking of the

Holy Spirit. He was looking forward to a new giving of the Spirit,

which undoubtedly at the moment had not been granted, neither was

it granted until Pentecost.

Later on in His life He spoke to His disciples of the coming ofthe Spirit, and spoke of it as the promise of the Father, which saidHe, He will send unto you. Here He was looking on in His own work,
looking on to the ultimate in His own work, the coming of the Spiritin a new way, and in new measure. We cannot read the Old Testament 
without coming into the presence of the Spirit. We see the Son in 
the beginning of our Bible, the Word, and the Spirit of God broodingupon the face of the chaos. But His coming to man was spasmodicand occasional. Now there was to be a new sense in which the Spiritwas to be given to abide, to remain ;
as Jesus said later, to be withHis own, and in His own.

If we can get back into the mind of the Lord, it is evident fromthis word of interpretation, He was looking on to that giving of theSpirit ;
and John has told us why that had not been done, andwhy that Spirit had not been given in that new sense. Why not ?
“
The Spirit had not yet been given, because Jesus was not yetglorified.”

We are halted again. What did He mean by His being glorified?
Read again the twelfth chapter of John, and then read the seventeenth,
words uttered by our Lord to His disciples, and in the other case wordsuttered by the Lord to His Father. There we find what is meant bythe glorification of Jesus. We may summarize it thus. The glorification 
of Jesus came when He was lifted on the Cross, out of the earth.
When He was lifted out of the earth, above it, He triumphed over it.
“
Now is the judgment of this world ;
now shall the prince of thisworld be cast out. And I, if I be lifted up out of the earth, will drawall men unto Myself.” The way of His glorification was the way ofHis Cross. and that which inevitablv followed the Cross, theresurrection. 
If there was no physical resurrection we are the biggest foolsin the universe. If the resurrection is going to be left a subject for 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

doubt, then we are in a perilous state. The glorification was the Cross 

and the uplifting and the ascension. Then He gave the Spirit. 

Here we find Him on this occasion, on the last day of the feast. 

We are led through that word in interpretation to look through His 

eyes to what was in front of Him, and the end was the giving of the 

Spirit ;
and the way was His Cross, His resurrection, His ascension, 

His glorifying. 

With all that in view, He said, “
If any man thirst, let him come 

unto Me, and drink. He that believeth on Me, as the scripture hath 

said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water. But this spake 

He of the Spirit.” We stay for a few moments with the figure itself, 

the flowing of the rivers. It is an old story with which every Bible 

student is familiar. It is important to recognize it
was said on the 

last day of the feast of tabernacles. There is a good deal of local 

colour
concerning the story which it is helpful for us to see. 

The feast of tabernacles lasted for eight days, seven days and 

one other, completing the octave. At the time of our Lord’s ministry 

they had superadded to the ritual observed in connection with that 

feast ;
and it was a very symbolic and suggestive thing they had done. 

Every day during that feast there was a procession of priests who, 

carrying some of the golden vessels on their shoulders empty, marched 

through the streets from the Temple, singing parts of the Great Hallel, 

that is, Psalms 113-118.
Then they filled those vessels with water, 

most probably at the running brook of Kedron. The procession then 

reformed with the vessels filled, and they marched back, still chanting 

parts of the Great Hallel, and there in the Temple courts in the presence 

of the assembled worshippers, they poured the water out of the golden 

vessels. 

What did they mean by it ? We have rabbinical interpretation. 
The carrying of the water was symbolical of two things. First, the 
fact that they had been in the wilderness, and God had miraculously 
supplied them with water over a period of years ;
and
then: the fact 
that when they came into the land, they no longer needed the supernatural 
supply, because there were springs and rivers everywhere in 
the land. The feast of tabernacles celebrated the entry into the land, 
and rejoiced that water had been provided in the wilderness, now no 
longer necessary. But, said the rabbis, the ritual signified more. 
It intimated the recognition of promises made to the people of a day 
that should come when there should be new fertilizing powers sweeping 
over the nation and the land, and for seven days they repeated this 
ceremony.

Now on the eighth day there was no procession of priests. The 
absence, said the rabbis, signified first there was no need for the supernatural 
supply of water as they had had in the wilderness, but it was 
also intended to signify that the long hoped for promise of the new 
dispensation of fruitfulness and rededication had not dawned. 

RIVERS 
On the last day, the great day, when there was no procession and

carrying of the water, Jesus stood and He said, “
If any man thirst,

let him come to Me, and drink. He that believeth on Me ... out 

of his inner life shall flow rivers of living water.” This He spoke of

the Spirit, and He employed this figure of living waters in that con
nection. He said, “
As the scripture hath said.” A great deal has

been written about that. Follow all through the Old Testament the

figure of rivers. The first occasion is in the second chapter of Genesis,

where we are told God planted a garden, and there went forth rivers.

That is a figure of speech ?
No, it is a historical fact, rivers to water

the garden.

We go on, all through the literature, and we find that psalmists

and prophets are constantly using the figures of rivers illustratively.

These rivers proceeded forth, somehow, and in some way from God.

We find, too, that the supreme Old Testament passage concerning the

rivers is in Ezekiel, chapter forty-seven, that marvellous passage, out

of which I take one sentence only. “
Everything shall livewhither-
soever
the river cometh.
“
If any man thirst, let him come unto

Me and drink. He that believeth on Me, out of his inner life shall

flow the rivers.” Everything shall Iive where those rivers come.

Rivers therefore are always suggestive of life, and in life in twoways, the satisfaction of life in its thirst ;
and
secondly, the fructifyingof all life, that it may bring forth a harvest. That cannot be repeatedtoo often. There He stood. John particularly said He stood. Onanother occasion He did not stand, but sat, While that does not mean 
very much to us to-day, it meant much in an Eastern land. When 
teaching He always sat, as the teachers all did. But when He was 
proclaiming as a herald He stood ;
and
on this occasion, as the feastof tabernacles was drawing to its conclusion, and its ritual was ceasing,
and all its suggestiveness was passing away, He stood. “
If any manthirst, let him come unto Me, and drink.”

Who is he that believes on Him ?
The man that thirsts, and thatthirsting soul who comes to Him and drinks, that is the man whobelieves. 

Have you believed in Jesus ?
I do not care about the creed justnow. Do you believe in Him ?
That is the first question. How are 
you to know ?
How am I to know ?
Ask yourself this ;
have I come 
to Him, and taken Him to quench my thirst ? Can I say,

 
I came to Jesus, and I drank, 
Of that life-giving stream,
My thirst was quenched, my soul revived,
And now I live in Him.” 

Can you say that ? Very well, that is preliminary. He that does that,
he that believes on Him, what will the result be ?
Out of his inner 
life shall flow the rivers. 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

272
The great teaching here is this, that the life-giving Spirit is to 

proceed to humanity through humanity. He comes from God. He 

comes because Jesus has been glorified ;
but if He is to pass on into 

human life, if He is to come bringing life wherever He comes, this 

river of the Spirit of God, renewing, regenerating, reviving, uplifting 

everything, how is He to come ?
Through you, through me, through 

human means. He that believes, out of his inner life shall %ow
the 

rivers. The great thing, the master thing is just that the life-giving 

Spirit which this moribund, if not already dead world needs, that 

life-giving Spirit which is to pass over-to quote Ezekiel-the marshy 

places and make them bright and beautiful and fruitful, the world 

will get that through believers in Jesus. “
He that believeth on Me, 

out of his inner life shall %ow 
the rivers.” 

That necessarily drives us back where we were. Who are they that 

believe on Him ?
Those who have come to Him, and have had their 

own thirst quenched, those who know what it means to have received 

the gift of the living water, that has become in them a well of water, 

springing up, laughing up, bubbling up, for ever springing, beautifying, 

satisfying. Those are the people. 

There are two things of supreme importance. No rivers ever %ow
from the lives of thirsty men and women. I wonder if that ought to 

be amended, and put thus. The proportion in which the rivers con
tinuously flow is the proportion in which we have ceased to be thirsty. 

“ 
Thou, 0 Christ, art all I want.” 

Men and women, is that true ?
What are you thirsty for ?
Are you 
thirsty still ?
As we reminded ourselves in considering the fourthchapter, 

“
We tried the broken cisterns, Lord, 
And Oh, those waters failed 
And as we stooped to drink, they fled,
And mocked us as they wailed.” 

That applies to all earthly attempts to satisfy the deep thirst of the 
human soul. 

Have we got beyond that ? Let us ask our own souls, Are we 
satisfied ?
Because unless we are, no rivers are flowing
from our lives. 
We may be good men and women, doing good things, but the running 
rivers are not there, The influence we are exerting is not that of the 
Spirit, because the eflluence,
the incoming of the Spirit, has not been 
what it ought to be. No rivers run from thirsty souls. 

Take the same statement, and turn it round. There is no thirst 
when the rivers are running. No rivers if we are still thirsty. No 
thirst ?
Then the rivers are running. 

LIGHT 273 

55.
L&ht
John viii: 12 

T
T
HIS IS the second of the great “
I am ”
claims of our Lord recorded 

by John. There are eight such found in his Gospel. Three of 

them are essential. Five of them are illustrative. This is the second 

such. We have considered the first, “ 
I am the bread of life.” This, 

like the first, centres upon the Lord Himself. Sometimes He took 

some parabolic illustration from Nature ;
but here this is a direct 

claim, ”
I am the light of the world.” 

Necessarily we link this claim with the Person, and with the deepest 

truth concerning Himself. John opens his Gospel, linking verses one 

and fourteen, “
In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was 

with God, and the Word was God ;
and the Word became flesh, and 

tabernacled among us .
.
. 
full of grace and truth.” That is the One 

Who is now speaking, ” 
I am the light of the world.” 

Still by way of introduction, to go farther back, to the book of 
Exodus, to that wonderful third chapter, in which after forty years 
in the wilderness Moses was called of God to a very definite position 
and occupation. Shrinking quite naturally from the tremendous 
task that was suggested to him, he asked God that question, “
Tell 
me, what is Thy name ?
”
According to the record the answer is in 
that marvellous passage. The great declaration of God recoiIed
upon 
itself, and repeats the affirmation, “ 
I am that I am.” That was His 
name, His memorial name. The centuries passed on, and by that nameHis people knew Him. Then there came a day when there stood One 
Who “
was made flesh ”
;
and He took the name uttered in the burning 
bush, and on five occasions He linked it with simple and sublime 
symbols. “ 
I am the bread of life,” and now “
I am the light of the 
world.” 

Following our usual practice in these studies, we consider first the 
subject He was illustrating when He said this ;
secondly, the figure 
that He employed ;
finally deducing the permanent teaching resulting 
from the use of the figure, under those circumstances. 

What made Jesus say at that point, “
I am the light of the world ?
”
Taking it out of its setting, it still stands in the revelation of the New 
Testament concerning Jesus. Under any circumstance we can imagine 
Him saying it. It would always have been typically true. But in 
order to our understanding, it is well to ask ourselves, Why did He 
say this then ? We must see the background in order to understand 
His claim in itself. In chapter seven we have the account of His 
presence at the feast of tabernacles, where He made His great claim 
of ability to quench the thirst of humanity ;
and His great proclamation 
that if any should believe on Him, they shouId
become sources 
PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

of blessing, men and women from whom the rivers of living water 
should flow. Now immediately following that claim there ensued 
discussion and division among the people, and among the rulers. I t 
was in the presence of that discussion on the following day that He 
made use of these words, and it was closely linked with that claim, 
to that proclamation and discussion. 

Note carefully how the eighth chapter opens. The story runs on. 
There is no break. The Revisers have taken the last verse of the 
seventh chapter, and have printed it closely connected with the 
eighth, with a gap between the fifty-second and fifty-third verses. 
There should be no gap there at all. If a gap is made, it should be 
at the end of the first verse of chapter eight. The story really runs
on. At the end of the discussion, “
They answered and said unto 
him ”
(that is, Nicodemus), ”
Art thou also of Galilee ? ”
Mark their 
contempt. “ 
Search, and see that out of Galilee ariseth no prophet.” 
That ended it for the day publicly. They dispersed. Where did they 
go ?
“
And they went every man unto his own house ;
but Jesus 
went unto the mount of Olives.” That is the natural ending of the 
seventh chapter. 

It then begins again, “
And early in the morning He came again 
into the temple.” They went home. They had homes to go to. He 
had none. He went to the mount of Olives. I do not know what He 
did in the mount of Olives that night. From His habit I think He spent 
it in communion ;
but notice that early in the morning He came back 
into those temple courts, “
And all the people came unto Him ;
and 
He sat down and taught them.” In the twentieth verse we read, 
“ 
These words spake He in the treasury, as He taught in the temple.”
That brings the scene back to mind. He had been in the mount of 
Olives all through the night. They had gone home and gone to rest, 
the people, but they were back there in the temple precincts in the 
morning, and He came early to the temple, made His way into the 
treasury, where He was when He saw the widow casting in the two 
mites ;
and He sat down and taught them. 

We have no account of what He said. At the feast of tabernacles 
He had stood and cried. That was the attitude of the herald. Now 
He took up the position of a teacher. He had come back to carry on 
among these people His wondrous teaching. 

Then follows in the record this little paragraph, the story of the 
woman. I affirm my conviction that this is a true story, and that it 
took place here at this time. Probably John did not write that story. 
Reading the Greek New Testament in Westcott and Hort’s text, this 
is put in at the end of the Gospel. It was so important that it couldnot be left out altogether. Nestle’s text has put it back here, but has 
put it in within brackets. It might be proven that this little story 
was put in by Papias, that marvellous extra-illustrator, who later 
added stories of Jesus, and inserted them. But let that go. He sat 

LIGHT a75
down and taught, and I think He was interrupted by the bringing

of this woman. We are not dealing with the story now.

At the twelfth verse we read, “
Again therefore Jesus spake untothem.” It is the resumption of teaching, broken in upon. He had been 
interrupted by these scribes and this woman. When that was over, 
and He had dismissed that crowd in a regal way, with august authority,
when in the midst of that crowd of accusers and accused had shone 
a light that was appalling, searching into the deep recesses of thesouls of the accusers, and shining into the darkened soul of the woman;
then He went on. ”
Again therefore Jesus spake unto them, saying,
I am the light of the world :
he that followeth Me shall not walk in 
the darkness, but shall have the light of life.”

This statement is so marvellous from the standpoint of the occasion.
The significant word in that statement is “ 
therefore.” Why “
therefore 
”
?
We may read it, and not notice it. We must go back andlink it with the darkness that was all round about them, evidencedin the religious rulers and the people concerning God ;
by the attitudeand activity of the accusers of the woman ;
darkness that was evident 
in the story of the woman herself. Because of this atmosphere, because 
of the discussions and the divisions, revealing the darkness in whichmen were living, therefore He said, “
I am the light of. theworld.” 

The subject therefore illustrated was that of how the darknessmight be banished, and men might see clearly the truth and the wayin which to go. ” 
I am the light of the world.”

Notice now the figure employed. This is a most fascinating theme. 
In the old days at school they taught what they called Physics. It 
had a threefold division, Sound, Light, and Heat. The word here He 
used for light is common in the New Testament, as common as ourword light is ;
the word Phos was common to the people who heardJesus. Our word light exactly conveys the meaning of that word Heused, Phos is derived from a word that means to shine, in order to 
make manifest. Phao is the verb. 

What is light ?
Take it and examine it by spectrum analysis, andwe discover at once light is a simple thing, and a vastly sublime thing.
So the figure He made use of here I do not hesitate to say is verysimple, so that every boy who perchance was in the temple courts,
or youth near by, seeing the light all about them in the early morning,
would understand and see. But examine it. Some say that lightconsists of seven primary colours, red, orange, yellow, green, blue,
indigo, violet. Strictly, however, there are only three primary colours,
red, blue, and yellow. All the others result from some combination 
of red, blue, and yellow. I remember the thrill that came to me as 
a boy with my first box of paints. I discovered one day, quite byaccident,qthat
if I took a bit of beautiful blue and glorious yellow,
I had the most radiant green. And so on. Light is a composite 

276
PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

of all these, ‘and they are brought into one, the red and blue andyellow.

But how is it accounted for ?
There is an interesting subject,
how in the last century the great discovery was made about light.
To go back earlier than that, the thinkers were under the masteryof Sir Isaac Newton. He had said that light was minute particlesprojected at great velocity from luminous bodies ;
that is that lightwas caused by the projection into the ether by a vast velocity, terrificforce of corpuscles or atoms from the sun and stars. Men believedthat for a long time. But at the beginning of the nineteenth centurythey discovered that the true explanation is that light is undulation.
That is to say, it is caused by waves, in an all pervading elastic medium,
and the colour depends upon the length of rays. Red is the longest.
I have been fascinated in the study of this. Light is a wondrousthing.

Then I sought for some definition of light, and I found two. Lighthas been defined by one of the great masters as “
radiant energy.”
The undulatory waves are there, beating through the ether; but itis radiant, and it is energy. I found something simpler still, and wesee the accuracy of this through what lies behind it. Light is “
the 
agent by which objects are rendered visible.” Everybody knows that.
Light is energy, and its sublimity is discovered. Movement all round 
the world. Sound, tone is created when the movement is so subtlethat sight could not see or grasp it. But it is the same thing. In a 
picture gallery we see the tone of that picture. We say, we like thetone of that organ. The tone of the picture and the tone of the music. 
It is the same thing-undulation. The mystery and the marvel ofit, but the simplicity of it. I like the last statement, “
the agent bywhich objects are rendered visible.” Wherever we see them thereis visibility, and always beauty. Visibility, we see it, but colour isbeauty in light. The Son of God never uttered a more marvellousword than when He said, in the midst of all the prevailing darkness,
“
I am the light of the world.” What infinite music of eternal vibration, 
in order to revelation and visibility and beauty, was contained inHis claim, “
I am the light of the world.”

We have still got our Bible, and I was glad to get back to it fromall these other sayings and readings. I did the old-fashioned thing,
and said, Where does light emerge in the Bible, and where does itpass out ? It is found right at the beginning, “
And God said, Letthere be light ;
and there was light ”
-light became, to translate moreliterally the Hebrew. That is where it came in. 

We go to the other end of the Book, and we look at a city, allbathed in &an&cent
light, and we read this, “
There shall be night 
no more ;
and they need no light of lamp, neither light of sun ;
for 
the Lord God shall give them light ;
and they shall reign for everand ever.” That is the last place in the Bible where the word is found. 

LIGHT 277 

We see from the beginning, a11
through the Literature there are con
stant allusions to light, and light falling upon human lives.

”
Send out Thy light, send out Thy truth that they may lead me.”

“
God is a sun and shield,” all the way through light.

“
Jesus said therefore, I am the light of the world,” the light of

the cosmos. That is the word
here. Not of the age, but of the cosmos.

Immediately we are pulled up. What is meant by the cosmos ? That 

word is used in varied applications. It is used of the whole framework 

of the universe, the cosmos ;
and it is sometimes used of man, all men,

the sum totality of humanity. It is sometimes used of the way in

which man orders his life. The root idea is order, the cosmos is the

order. Christ says, “
I am the light.” “
I am the light of,” that is,

I am the light for, I am the light in the midst of the cosmos. Use the 

word as you will, the word cosmos ;
I am the light in the midst of

the universe, with all its far-flung distances. I am the light in the

sum totality of humanity. I am the light revealing the true order,

the way in which man should go. Said Jesus, I am the Revealer and

the Interpreter of the cosmos.

A little later on He was talking to His disciples, and He said, “
I 
am the way, and the truth, and the life.” So He is the light aboutthe Universe. He is the light about humanity. He is the light aboutthe true order of life. Go back to that first definition of radiant 
energy, the light that is also pure, shining in the darkness, bringingenergy, and reveahng
the true meaning of a11
things :
the light of the 
cosmos. 

Then the value of the claim is revealed in the immediately followingdeclaration ;
but mark its sublimity. There is no need to dwell uponit. “
I am the light of the world. He that followeth Me shall not 
walk in the darkness, but shall have the light of life.”

We conclude this meditation by reminding ourselves of the challenging 
word that fell from the lips of Jesus on other occasions, whenHe said to His disciples, “
Ye are the light of the world.” In thatsame connection there He said, “
Even so let your light shine beforemen, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Fatherwhich is in heaven.” What a challenging word. I love it, and do notdesire to interpret it, but apply it. “
I am the light of the world.”
“
Ye are the light of the world.”

One more reference to the incident at the beginning of the chapter.
See the light when He lifted Himself up and said to that group ofaccusing men, He among you that is sinless, let him first cast a stoneat her. Down in the darkened secret of their lives the light flashed,
and they could not bear it, and they turned and went out from theeldest of them to the youngest. See the light shed upon that woman,
into her heart. He knew her. He knew all the circumstances. “
Where 
are thine accusers ?
Did no man condemn thee ?
”
“
No man, Lord.”
“
Neither do I condemn thee.” He showed her the possibilities, “
Go 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

thy way, no longer continue in sin.” “
Again therefore Jesus said,
I am the light of the world.” 

56.
The Door of
the
Sheep
John x : I-g
IT WILL be remembered that John has recorded eight occasions uponwhich our Lord employed the Divine name, “
I am,” in makingclaims for Himself. Of these three are essential, plain declarations,
“
Before Abraham was, I am.” “
I am the resurrection and the life,”
”
I am the way, and the truth, and the life.” With these we are not 
dealing in this present series, which is concerned with the parabolicillustrations. 
Of the eight, five were such of the essential claim as it wasuttered in the words “
I am.” This is the third of these, “
I am 
the door ”
;
and it is closely linked to the next study on the goodShepherd.
Yet the phases are so different so that we take them necessarilyas separate studies. We consider then this illustration, “
I am 
the door ”
;
following the usual method of enquiring the subjectour Lord was intending to illustrate ;
then considering thefigure He employed ;
deducing from these two things teaching forourselves. 
What was it that our Lord was illustrating ?
We may take theseparables of Jesus, and apply them in ways that are really not appropriate, 
and so miss the real value of them, unless we know what ourLord was talking about at the time. His friends and His critics were 
round about Him when He said, “
I am the door.” Looking carefullyat the passage in verse seven we read this, “
Jesus therefore said unto 
them again, Verily, verily, I say unto you, I am the door of the sheep.”
Whenever we read “
therefore ”
we ask, Wherefore ?
What does the 
therefore lean back upon ?
Go back to the previous verse. “
This 
parable spake Jesus unto them ;
but they understood not what thingsthey were which He spake unto them. Jesus therefore said unto them 
again.” He repeated the parable in a new form, and with a newemphasis, “
I am the door of the sheep.” The word “
parable ”
in 
verse six should not be there, for John never uses the word parable,
though we sometimes render it so. That is inadequate. For ourunderstanding, it would be better if we used the word allegory. That 
is the word of John. This allegory spake Jesus to them, and they didnot understand. Now we find out why He said again, “
I am the 
door.” 
But what was the parable ?
It is the parable of a door ;
it is the 

THE DOOR OF THE SHEEP 

parable of a way into a fold through the door ;
the only way into the 
fold through the door. So the word “
therefore ”
drives us back to 
verse six, which explains the “ 
therefore.” The reason was that 
those who heard Him speaking did not understand what He had 
said, the allegory He had employed of a. sheepfold, and a door of 
entrance. 

What then was it all about ?
Why did He use that parable ?
It 
was a remarkable thing Jesus said. In the background we have the 
story of His giving of sight to a man born blind. Everything grew 
out of that. It is the only record we have of Jesus dealing with what 
we call now congenital disease, a man born blind. We remember the 
story. When He had given that man his sight, it aroused a great deal 
of interest and attention among the people, and they were very much 
puzzled by it. What did they do ?
Arrested, perplexed, they took 
this man to the constituted religious authorities. The Hebrew background 
of authority is seen in this story. The Pharisees were those 
who, as Jesus said upon another occasion, sat in Moses’ seat. They 
were the interpreters of the law ;
but they had become far more than 
that. They had become those who claimed full and final authority to 
interpret the order of life. The people brought this blind man to 
them. 

Without going into the wonderful story of what happened, I come 
to the consummation where I find this statement (ix. 34,
“ 
They 
answered and said unto him, Thou wast altogether born in sins, and 
dost thou teach us ? 
And they cast him out.“ Be particular when 
you read that. Do not imagine they were in some room of the temple 
courts, and that they went to the door and put him out. It is far more 
than that. They pronounced upon him the word of excommunication. 
They put him out of the order in which they themselves officiated. 
They resented any interference. As we look back, we see a strange 
thing happen. The man born blind, who has received his sight,-and 
he is quite certain of that,-who is in controversy with these very 
rulers, is approaching a larger understanding of the fact of Jesus 
Himself. “ 
Whether He be a sinner, I know not,” he said at one point. 
Then he went further and said, How has a man who is a sinner done 
this thing 1
They replied, “
Dost thou teach us ?
”
and they put him 
out. They would brook no such interference with their religious, legal, 
or civic authority. Consequently they put him out. He was cut off 
by their action from relationship with that whole order of life in which 
he had been born, and to which they all belonged. 

What happened ? Jesus heard that they had excommunicated 
him, that they had cast him out, and finding him, He said, “
Dost thou 
believe on the Son of God ? ”
And the man answered, “
And who is 
He, Lord, that I may believe on Him ?
”
There is a recognition of 
superiority expressed in terms of courtesy, “
Who is He, Lord, that 
I may believe ?
”
And Jesus said, “
Thou ha&
both seen Him, and 

280 PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

He it is that speaketh with thee.” And the man said, “
Lord, I believe. 

And he worshipped Him.” 

Two scenes. A man excommunicated by the religious authorities. 

Jesus found him, challenged him on one central point, that of His 

own personality, and the man did not understand ;
and yet there was 

something in the very tones of Jesus, so that the man said, I believe, 

and he worshipped Him. Excommunicated, put outside, the door shut 

against him by the religious authority ;
and Jesus stands in front of 

him, and opens a door into a new order, receives him to Himself, 

accepts his worship. 

Then Jesus turning to those who were round about Him, Pharisees 

and others, said, “
He that entereth not by the door into the fold of 

the sheep, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a 

robber.” 

They did not understand Him ;
therefore He said again, “
I am 

the door of the sheep,” and presently, “ 
I am the good Shepherd.” 

The two statements are Iinked.
However, we are dealing with the 

first. We see something not fanciful, but something very real, though 

at this distance we may forget the surroundings, the people round. 

The disciples saw what He was doing. The man had been excom
municated. Then He went to him, He received him. Now He says, 

What I did was to present Myself to that soul as the Door, entry 

through which he found himself in a new order, an entirely new 

economy. 

The subject, then, our Lord was ihustrating
was the institution of 

a new order altogether, a new economy, entry into which was through 

Him, and through Him alone ;
the fold, and the way into it. This 

man had been admitted into the fold by that way. 

Stay now with the figure itself, an Eastern fold. Jesus said in the 
first verse I 
the door into the fold of the sheep.” We must be careful 
to draw the distinction between the fold and the flock.
The fold was 
a walled or palisaded enclosure, always open to the wind. The very 
word translated fold implies that, the sweeping wind, not a roof, but 
an enclosing wall. The sheep did not climb the walls. In that country 
there was only one entry, one door, never two. The door-apparent 
paradox-was merely an opening in the wall or palisade. It was never 
a gateway in those Eastern folds, never a door on hinges. It
was 
merely an opening. That is the picture that was in the mind of Christ, 
familiar to all who heard Him when He said “
I am the door of the 
sheep.” 

An illustration had much effect upon me many years ago now, 
and I have quoted it before, but will repeat it. It was my priviIege
to cross the Atlantic with Sir George Adam Smith. He told me this 
story. He was travelling in the East one day, and came up to one 
of those folds, a wall in this case, and there was an opening in the 
wall. The shepherd was on hand, so Sir George said to him, “
Is that 

THE DOOR OF THE SHEEP 

a fold for sheep ?
”
” 
Oh yes,” he replied. Sir George then said, “
I 
only see one way in.” “ 
Yes,” said the man, “
there it is, there is the 
door,” pointing to the opening in the wall. Then Sir George said to 
him, “
But there is no door there ”
;
and to his amazement-for it 
was naturally said, they were not talking of the New Testament, or of 
Christianity-this shepherd said to him, “ 
Oh, I am the door.” Sir 
George said his mind went back to John‘s record. He said to the 
shepherd, “
What do you mean, by calling yourself the door ?
”
To 
which the shepherd replied, “
The sheep go inside, and I come there 
and lie down across the threshold, and no sheep can get out except 
over my body, and no woIf 
can get in except over me.” 

That illustration is enough. “ 
I am the door of the sheep.” We 
come to the subject of the shepherd in our next study. But what does 
all this mean ? Keep in mind the surroundings, the blind man excommunicated, 
and admitted, put outside the ancient order, but brought 
into close fellowship with Jesus. What did He do that day ? His 
parable illustrates what He did. First we see in that act, perhaps the 
first of its kind in the ministry of Jesus, His supersedure of a failing 
religious order. That order had excommunicated the man. What 
did Jesus do ? Christ excommunicated the whole order. He put it 
outside the realm of authority. That is what He meant when He said, 
“ 
All that came before Me are thieves and robbers.” That verse seems 
to have troubled some people. He was not referring to the prophets 
and Moses. He was referring to those who were claiming that final 
authority that these men claimed, when they excommunicated the 
man. In that sense in which they had claimed authority they were 
only thieves and robbers. He claimed to be the door, the Superseder

of a failing order. 

My mind travels away to that parenthesis in the letter to the 
Hebrews, when the writer said “ 
The law made nothing perfect.” 
There the reference was not to the law of God merely, but to the wholeeconomy supposedly based upon the law of God. But it had perfected 
nothing. All it had done in the case of this man was to put him outside,
excommunicate him. Jesus once said, addressing these very rulers, 
“
Woe unto you lawyers !
for ye took away the key of knowledge ;
ye entered not in yourselves, and them that were entering in ye 
hindered.” They supposed they were putting a man outside the pale 
of religion. They were really preventing him, and yet preparing him 
for entering into that realm, as it was now to be administered by the 
Lord Himself. 

It is beautiful here to see what He says in the ninth verse, as the 
result of entering in through the door. “
I am the door ;
by Me if 
any man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and go out, and 
shall find pasture.” Three things, ponder them. If any man enters 
through Me into this new order, into this fold, and becomes a member 
of the flock, he finds salvation. That is the first thing. “
He shall 

282 PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

go in and go out,” the pathway of service. But he shall also find 
pasture, he shall have sustenance. 

How does it all begin ? Go back and look at that blind man face 
to face with Christ. “
Dost thou believe on the Son of God ?
”
Some 
MSS. render that “ 
Son of man.” Whichever rendering is accepted 
makes no difference at all ;
for “
the Son of man ” 
was the Lord’s 
favourite description of Himself. If He here called Himself the Son 
of man it does not devalue the thought. Dost thou believe in Me ? 
Yet the title had been used, whether Son of man or Son of God. And 
the man said, Who is He, that I may believe ? Let us try to put ourselves 
into the soul of the blind man. For the first time he had been 
able to see, to look upon the shimmer of the waters of Galilee, had seen 
his mother’s face, and was able to see this Being, and He says, Thou 
hast seen Him, and I am He. At once the man’s soul went over to 
Him in glad surrender, “ 
Lord, I believe,” and he offered Him worship. 
That is how he went into the fold. That is how every man enters 
the fold. That is how every human being enters, face to face with 
Christ Who challenges them. He does not ask us if we believe the 
Apostles’ Creed. He does not ask if we have accepted this view or 
the other, but, Who am I ? Do you believe in Me ?
Yes, I believe ;
and, believing, I worship. So the fold is entered. 

The overwhelming revelation is that Christ is the way of entrance 
to the fold of the Kingdom of God, with all its privileges and all its 
responsibilities. If other systems professedly having all authority cast 
men outside, He confronts them and says, Here is the door, here is 
the way. All this harmonizes with what He said to the disciples a 
little later on. “
I am the way, and the truth, and the life ;
no one 
cometh 
unto the Father but by Me.” The fold is the place of the 
Kingship of God found, yielded to, acknowIedged
;
and the way in is 
Christ. He stands in the gap and says, “ 
I am the door.” To go back 
to Sir George Adam Smith’s story, He is the door, and we cannot 
go out except across His body, and no ravening wolf can reach those 
sheep except across His body. “ 
I am the door.” 

57.
The
Good
Shepherd
John x: II-IS 

T
T
HIS the fourth of the parabolic illustrations used by our Lord 
in connection with His great claim, “ 
I am,” “
I am the, good 
Shepherd.” We have already considered three :
“
I am the bread of 
life,” ‘
I am the light of the world,” “ 
I am the door.” Now that of 
the good Shepherd is closely linked with that of the door, and by way 
of introduction we must tarry with that fact. Our Lord had made 

THE GOOD SHEPHERD 

use of that illustration in that claim, ”
I am the door of the 
sheep ”
;
in connection with the same teaching, “
I am the good 
Shepherd.”

We ask, then, What was He illustrating ? Then we will consider 
the figure itself, in order that from it we may deduce the teaching 
intended by our Lord, when He used this figure of the good 
Shepherd. 

When the Lord had opened the eyes of the blind man the people 
brought him to the Pharisees, the religious authorities. The man grew 
in understanding himself as he talked to them, until they were angry 
with him ;
and as John tells us, they cast him out, which meant that 
they put him out, not of the temple precincts, but they excommunicated 
him. They put him outside the covenant, and outside the 
established order over which for the time being they were in authority. 
Whether their exercise of authority was good or not we are not discussing. 
We know it was not. When the Lord knew they had cast 
him out, He found him and there passed between this man and Jesus 
that little conversation, and He asked, in effect, Do you believe in 
Me ?
In that moment Jesus received him to Himself. It was then 
He said, “
I am the door,” and by that figure of speech He claimed that 
He was the way of entry into a new order entirely. That may be put 
in another way. They had excommunicated the man, and Jesus 
excommunicated them. He did so on subsequent occasions more 
definitely and specifically, when He said the Kingdom of God should 
be taken away from them. By that action He was putting Himself 
in the place of authority, and He was receiving this man into the 
entirely new order that He was in the world to set up. Then He 
said, “ 
I am the door.” By that He claimed that He was the way 
of entry to that new order, that men should enter into it through Him, 
as this man had done, when he had submitted to Him in belief, and 
worshipped Him in person. 

We now come to the second thing. Under that claim, “
I am 
the good Shepherd,” He revealed the nature of the new order. This 
man had been received into a new order, in which He is the way of 
entry, and then still in that same realm of ideas, He said, ”
I am 
the good Shepherd.” Those were the circumstances, and the evident 
intention of our Lord in the use of these two figures of speech at 
this point. 

We now confine ourselves to the wonderful figure, and ask again 
What was the figure which He employed ?
It was a figure of a shepherd 
with folds and a flock. The fold is an enclosure. The flock is those 
who are encIosed.
It is important to make that distinction. He did 
not say there should be one fold and one shepherd, but one flock. 
There may be many folds, just as in that Eastern country. The shepherd 
in that land may own two or three dozen sheep, and they can be 
folded in many folds, but it is one flock. The unity was not created 

284
PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

by the fold, but by the nature of the sheep, and their relationship to 
the shepherd. 

The shepherd was the one not only able to take charge of the flock. 
This is an Eastern picture, different from anything we know in this 
country. The sheep know his voice. That is literally true of Eastern 
shepherds. If a stranger came along, the sheep wouId
shrink back ;
they know their shepherd’s voice, and follow when he calls. He was 
in charge of them, and it was his work to lead them out of the fold 
to pasturage, in order to the sustenance of their life. Of course it was 
also his work to defend them against wolves, or any enemies. That 
was the Eastern shepherd. 

But when our Lord used this figure, I think there can be no doubt 
that He was employing the figure in one way. The shepherd was 
always the symbol of the king. It was Homer who once said, ”
All 
kings are shepherds of their people.” It was a great idealistic word. 
As we look down human history we may be inclined to say, amending 
that statement, All kings should be shepherds. God’s kings were 
always shepherds, and the shepherd was the king. I quote a verse oft 
quoted. Our Lord was talking to His disciples one day, and said to 
them, “
Fear not, little flock ; 
for it is your Father’s good pleasure to 
give you the Kingdom.” I can imagine a purely literary critic coming 
to that sentence in some booklet published to-morrow, who might 
indulge in pleasantries. He might say, The writer now broke down 
in his employment of his figures. He first suggests the flock of sheep, 
“ 
Fear not, little flock.” Then forgetting that, he went off to the idea 
of the family, “ 
It is your Father’s good pleasure ”
;
and before he 
finished, he had forgotten that figure also, and used the figure of a 
nation, “
to give you the Kingdom.” We know perfectly well, however, 
that though the figures merge they do not mix. Those are the three 
elements that constitute Kingship ideally in all that Eastern country, 
and ought to everywhere. The king should be the shepherd of his 
flock, the father of his family, the one in authority over his nation. 
When our Lord said quietly, but with august majesty and dignity, 
“ 
I am the good Shepherd,” all those figures, all those implications 
of the figure of the shepherd and the flock, unquestionably merge in 
His claim, “ 
I am the good Shepherd.” 

We come now to the supreme matter. What was the teaching, the 
thing revealed ?
What did Jesus claim when He said that ?
Two 
things, absolute authority and constant care in and over the new order 
that He was in the world to establish. God had established the order 
of the Hebrew people but they had broken down. Need that be argued 
or even illustrated ? Is there anything more ghastly than the failure 
of the Hebrew people from the beginning to the end ? They were 
always failing, and they never failed more disastrously than when they 
wanted a king “ 
like the nations.” In that act, as God said to Samuel, 
they had rejected Him from being King. It had gone on through the 

THE GOOD SHEPHERD 

ages, and the last thing the Hebrew people did to prove their ultimate

and appalling catastrophic folly and sin was to crucify the Son of God.

So God was superseding the order definitely established ;
as the writer 

of the letter to the Hebrews said, the law “
made nothing perfect.”

It broke down and failed, and its failure was manifested in that one

incident. When those men in authority put this man out, they revealed

their failure. Then Jesus took him in, and admitted him to the new

order to which He was the door. 

Now He is in authority. I am the King. I am the Father of the

family. I am the Shepherd, the good Shepherd of all
the flock. We 

see then a new order emerging in human history, by the act of God.

The same Kingdom, the same eternal Throne, but, in its administration

in earthly affairs, a new dispensation, a new economy. When Jesus

said, ”
I am the good Shepherd,” so simple, so beautiful, that all our

hymns express it in the terms of tenderness and love ;
there is more 

in it than that. If there is in the claim the evidences of infinite tender
ness, there is the evidence of supreme authority. “
I am the good

Shepherd.” It marks not only authority, but it does mark care in 

every way.

As our Lord went on speaking He revealed the method of His

authority as the good Shepherd, that great title in which there merge

the ideas of Kingship, of Fatherhood, and Shepherdhood. He shows 

how He exercises that authority and that care. In verse eleven He 

says, “
The good shepherd layeth down his life for the sheep.” In 

verse fifteen He says, “
I lay down My life for the sheep,” and again,

in verse seventeen, “
Therefore doth the Father love Me, because I

lay clown My life that I may take it again.” There is a growth ofteaching here. How will He lay down His life ? In conflict with the 

wolf, who comes to destroy and to harm, to harass, and to kill. In 
order to overcome that wolf, I will lay down My life ;
I lay down Mylife on their behalf. That is the idea of the first verse. Then presentlythere is something else. ” 
I lay down My life, that I may take it again.”
That is more than dying ;
that is rising. That is more than goingdown to death in the grapple with the wolf, and the wolf kills. But 
He is coming through and out and beyond the grapple with the wolfinto the place of victory over him. “
I lay down My life, that I maytake it again.”

Then follows that august claim, “
No one taketh it away from Me,
but I lay it down of Myself. I have authority to lay it down, and Ihave power to take it again.” Here is the second idea; laying downHis life for the sheep, first, in conflict with the wolf ;
laying down,
secondly, His life that the sheep may share His life. He takes it againto bring His sheep into union with Himself ;
victory over the wolf,
and conflict that issues in victory ;
and then fellowship with the KingHimself in consequent life. “
I lay down My life, that I may take itagain,” 

286 PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

Thus the two statements are interpreted by what He says in verse 

seventeen, “
Therefore doth the Father love Me, because I lay down 

My life, that I may take it again.” ” 
I am the good Shepherd,” in 

complete authority, having the care of the sheep ;
and My method 

of Kingship is first dying to kill the wolf ;
rising to share My life with 

the sheep who have been delivered from the wolf. 

Then it was that He glanced on, and took a larger outlook upon 
this new order. He said, “
Other sheep I have, which are not of this 
fold ;
them also I must bring, and they shall hear My voice, and they 
shall become one flock, one Shepherd.” Not one fold necessarily, 
but one flock. It is interesting to remember how in the next chapter 
(xi.), we have the striking story of Caiaphas, the clever and astute 
politician. When these enemies of Christ, these men exercising 
authority in a wrong way, were plotting as to what they should do 
with Him, Caiaphas rose after their discussion, and introduced his 
subject by that excellent formula, if one wants to be heard, “
Ye know 
nothing at all.” He said this, “
It is expedient for you that one man 
should die for the people, and that the whole nation perish not.” Then 
follows this remarkable little passage of interpretation. “
Now this 
he said not of himself ;
but being high priest that year, he prophesied 
that Jesus should die for the nation ;
and not for the nation only, but 
that He might gather together into one the children of God that are 
scattered abroad.” “
Other sheep I have, which are not of this fold ;
them also I must bring, and they shall hear My voice ;
and they shall 
become one flock, 
one Shepherd.” 

Again, what was the deep secret of His authority, the secret of 
His care, the secret of His laying down of His life for the sheep ?
“
Therefore doth the Father love Me, because I lay down My life, that 
I may take it again,” The deep secret was the Father’s love, and the 
love of the Son in co-operation with the purposes of the Father. So 
we have the claims of the new order. Jesus the good Shepherd, in 
authority, caring, acting by laying down His life in conflict with the 
wolf, acting by laying down His life, by taking it again, that it might 
be shared by His own ;
so
creating and constituting the new order 
of the Kingdom of God under His authority. 

Go back over the Old Testament, Psalm xxiii., Isaiah xl., Jeremiah 
xxiii., Ezekiel xxxiv., xxxvii., Zechariah xi., all these are abput
shepherds, 
all looking on to the same great Shepherd. Here we stand 
and hear Him say, I am He, I am the Shepherd fulfilling the idealism 
of the psalms, realizing the ideal of the prophets, all of them ;
”
I
am 
the good Shepherd,” I am the Shepherd, the good. That is the form 
of the statement literally in the Greek. Something may be missed 
by having changed it. “ 
I am the Shepherd, the good.” Presently 
we come to His statement, “ 
I am the true vine,” literally again, “
I 
am the vine, the true.” The very form of the sentence suggests comparison 
with all others, He said ”
All that came before Me are thieves 

DEATH AS SLEEP 

and robbers,” that is, all who claimed absolute authority, as those 
rulers did when they put the man out. They were thieves and robbers. 
He said, “
I am the Shepherd, the good ;
and the word good there is 
beautiful. It is the Greek word kales,
which is rendered beautiful, 
noble, true, as well as good, It was a word that marked the attributes 
to all perfection ;
and they all emerge from and merge in Him for 
evermore. He is the Shepherd true, noble, beautiful, infinite in wonder. 
This all ends with the first words, “ 
I am,” God manifestly seen and 
heard, heaven’s beloved One. “ 
I am,” King, Father, Shepherd 
true. 

$3.
Death as
Sleep 

John xi: II-IS, 23-26a
0 UR SUBJECT here is death as sleep ;
and the story is that of the 
final sign in the realm of works, wrought by our Lord in His 
earthly ministry, as recorded by John ;
that of the raising of Lazarus. 
In this story we see Him in the presence of death on the physical level, 
that is, the separation of the spirit and body. Death in the spiritual 
level is the separation of the soul from God. In that sense, in the day 
that man ate of the forbidden fruit, he died, for in that day he was 
separated from God. Man’s physical death did not come at once, 
though that came ultimately. 
Twice before in the record of our Lord’s ministry we see Himstanding in the presence of death. Once it was the child of Jairus, and 
again it was the son of the widow of Nain. Here death is seen in the 
case of the brother of Martha and Mary, and on that physical level 
this is superlative. In the first case the child was dead in the house, 
and not many hours had passed. In the second case the boy was on his 
way from the city to burial, but not yet buried. Here we are in the 
presence of.
death, of a man who had been dead four days, and buried 
four days. Therefore this is a superlative case. 
So we proceed along the usual lines in these studies, considering 
first the subject illustrated, the figure of sleep in the presence of death ;
then simply and quickly take the figure itself, in order that we may 
deduce the teaching. 
What was the fact that our Lord was facing ?
Jesus said when 
the news was brought to Him over Jordan, “
This sickness is not unto 
death, but for the glory of God ”
(v. 4). Again at verse thirteen, “
Jesus 
had spoken of his death.” In those verses there is the common word 
for death, tkanatos,
which means just what we mean by death. Again, 
at verse thirty-nine, ” 
Martha, the sister of him that was dead.” At 
verse forty-four, ” 
He that was dead came forth.” Once more, in the 
fourteenth verse, “
Jesus therefore said unto them plainly, Lazarus 

288 PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

is dead,” or as it should be, “ 
Lazarus died.” The reference is to a fact, 

an accomplished fact. 

In those verses two words, “ 
death,” and “
dead ”
occur. In verses 

four and thirteen we have the word thanatos, the simple word for death. 

In verses thirty-nine and forty-four we have a word associated with 

the other, in a strengthened form of it, the word thnesko, dead. When 

our Lord used the phrase, “ 
Lazarus is dead,” He used yet another 

and intensive form of the same word, a+othnesko.
It might be rendered, 

though it is not beautiful, or euphemistic, He has died off ;
he is simply 

dead. So by this group of words we are in the presence of death, in 

the presence of the dead. 

What was our Lord doing when He used this figure of speech ?
First of all, we see that He had a clear view of the fact of death. He 
knew the fact as they saw it. He knew the fact as it was recurring 
around Him in all the time of His public ministry. He knew the fact 
as these men saw it, as Martha and Mary saw it in the case of Lazarus ;
but in His first reference to it He did not use either of these words 
for death. When the disciples misunderstood Him and thought He 
really was referring to natural sleep, then John says He said plainly 
-mark that word-He said distinctly, positively, Oh no, that is not 
the case of taking rest ;
he is dead, he has died ;
he has shared the 
experience that is covered by the word that men had constantly used ;
he is dead, he is to be numbered among those who are dead. He saw 
death as they saw it, and consequently when they did not understand 
Him, He said the plain thing, He is dead, emphasizing it in the word 
He used, completely dead, actually dead. The body that has been 
put in the sepulchre is lifeless ;
he is dead. 

But before we can approach or understand His figure of speech, 
we have to take the whole story. If He saw the fact of death as they 
saw it, He knew the fact of death as they did not know it. Here we 
are in the presence of that outlook of Jesus which is so manifest in 
all the story of His life ;
that whereas He saw the near, that which 
was right under their eyes, He always saw more. He never looked 
upon life as complete, as it could be viewed at the moment under the 
circumstances. He saw more. He saw through ;
and therefore He 
said, Lazarus is sleeping. They said, He will do well ;
he will recover. 
No, He said, he is dead, as you mean death ;
but I see more than you 
do. Those are the circumstances, and it was to illustrate that, that 
He used this figure of speech, 

Now take the figure and look at it simply. What is sleep ?
It is 
not cessation of being even on the human level. When we go to sleepit does not mean our being has ceased in sleep. What is it therefore ? 
Unconsciousness of all things around. I am not going into the subject 
of dreams, those strange experiences that we all have. I am dealing 
with normal and proper sleep, when we have eaten the sort of supper 
we ought to eat !
We are unconscious of everything. We say some
DEATH AS SLEEP 

times of someone, he was sleeping like a baby. There it is, completely 
unconscious of surrounding things. That is the figure our Lord used, 
and therefore we have come rightly and very beautifully to associate 
the idea of sleep with repose. The words are recurring ” 
Nature’s 
sweet restorer, balmy sleep.” That is what those men with Jesus 
thought when they said, if Lazarus was asleep, he would recover. 
If a man has been ill, and has really gone to sleep, he will recover, he 
will be saved ;
literally that is what they said. The danger is past, 
for he is sleeping. 

Let us notice another thing in passing. This figure that our Lord 
made use of was not a new one for death. Sleep as the image of death 
is common in literature from its dawn. Pagan writers used it as well 
as those of the Hebrew people. Westcott says the image of sleep 
for death is very common in all Rabbinic writings. That is the image 
our Lord took up. Yes, Lazarus was dead. He spoke plainly. One 
is always thankful He did, for the sake of men who were not grasping 
the significance of His reference to Lazarus being asleep. He said, 
he is dead. He died definitely, positively, died off ;
he is gone, he is 
lifeless. That is all true. 

But Jesus was seeing more than they did. Martha and Mary saw 
a lifeless corpse, and Martha, dear heart, was blunt in her description 
of the condition of that corpse as she expected it was by this time. 
Those disciples who had travelled up, heroically going, as Thomas 
said, “
Let us also go, that we may die with Him ”
;
if they had been 
able to look into the tomb when the stone was rolled away, they would 
have seen wrapped in the cerements of the tomb the dead body. That 
is what they saw, and that is all they saw. But Jesus said, That is 
not all. As a matter of fact it is not the supreme fact. He is dead, 
he has lost the consciousness of all the things that are around him, his 
sisters and friends, and everything else. He is dead ;
but he is not 
dead in the full and deep sense of the word. He saw the dead body, 
but He saw the man ;
and the man was not in the sepulchre as He 
saw him. So that He said, So far as this side is concerned, so far as 
you are concerned, he is dead ;
but so far as he is concerned, and 
the things of this side, he is unconscious, he knows nothing about 
them. 

We might indulge in many speculations, which are not profitable. 
I am often asked, Do the loved ones know what we are doing here ?
I do not think so. Bishop Bickersteth in that remarkable poem, 
“ 
Yesterday, To-day, and For Ever,” thought there might be circumstances 
under the government of God, when they are permitted to see 
and know, but as a rule, so far as we are concerned, they are asleep. 
They have no consciousness of what is going on here. And are we not 
really glad that is so, for their sakes ?
I often am. 

What then is the teaching which we have here ?
First, the clear 
evidence that Christ’s outlook on personality was that of its continuity 

I9
PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

290
beyond death. Even when as to this world they were asleep, unconscious, 
and we cannot communicate with them in any way, they werenot actually dead, they had not ceased to be. Notice this simple thing.
When presently He had told them to roll away the stone, and theyhad done it, what did He do ?
He spoke to the man. He spoke tohim by the name they had known him, “
Lazarus, come forth.” He 
spoke to the same man, the same personality. That man could not 
have heard Martha, if she had said, Lazarus, come back. Oh no.
That man could not have heard Peter or John, standing there, if theyhad called into the void, after him. But he heard Jesus, and Jesusaddressed him. He did the same with the little girl. He laid His hand 
on her, and said, I
Talitha cumi,
little lamb, arise. He spoke to one 
who could hear Him. Not the father and mother. They could notreach her. She was asleep so far as they were concerned. She wasnot asleep so far as He was concerned. And when He approachedthe bier coming out of the city of Nam, we have exactly the same thing.
“ 
Young man, arise,” as to one who could hear Him, and one who didhear Him. They all heard Him ;
and He brought them back fromthe sleep that was the unconsciousness of the things here and nowinto consciousness of them, and into the position in which they becameconscious of them. Sleep!
But of course the whole thing hinges on that point. I say emphatically, 
no other voice could have reached that maid, that young man,
Lazarus ;
but His voice could. The fact that His voice could, demonstrates 
the fact that those addressed were able somewhere, somehow,
to hear Him. Lazarus heard and struggled into an upright position inhis grave-clothes, as would be quite possible if they, as they certainlydid, adopted the Egyptian method of winding him. He could and did 
get up, and then Jesus said, ”
Loose him, and let him go.” The little 
girl, not yet wrapped in her grave-clothes, but lying there, she heardHis voice, and she sat up, and opened her eyes. The young man wasable to struggle up on his bier, possibly helped from it, and Jesus gavehim back to his mother. 

So that if we speak of death as sleep we must recognize that theonly One Who can wake out of sleep is our Lord Himself, the onlyOne Who can bring back into consciousness those fallen on sleep. No 
one else can. We remember that old trite quotation from Gray’s 
Elegy,

 
Can storied urn or animated bust 
Back to its mansion call the fleeting breath?
Can honour’s voice provoke the silent dust,
Or flattery soothe the dull cold ear of death ?
There is only one answer to Gray, when he thus sings. No, you cannotreach them, but Jesus could, and Jesus did.
Let us go back in this Gospel of John to some things He said onan earlier occasion in His ministry. “
As the Father raiseth the dead 

DEATH AS SLEEP 
and quickeneth them, even so the Son also quickeneth whom He will.”
Again, “
Verily, verily, I say unto you, The hour cometh, and now is,
when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God ;
and they thathear shall live.” And yet once more, “
Marvel not at this ;
for the 
hour cometh, in which all that are in the tombs shall hear His voice,
and shall come forth ;
they that have done good, unto the resurrectionof life ;
and they that have done ill, unto the resurrection ofjudg
ment.” Those are the great and astounding facts that He declaredin the earlier part of His ministry as recorded in John’s fifth chapter.
But it is His voice that can call them. It is His voice which they canhear; no other voice.

Seeing that this is so, we realize that they that sleep in Jesus willGod bring with Him. Therefore we sorrow not as those that have 
no hope. For if Christ died and rose again even them that sleep inJesus will God bring with Him. Some may sing that hymn with new 
meaning, 

“
Sleep on, beloved, sleep, and take thy rest;
Lay down thy head upon thy Saviour’s breast ;
We love thee well ;
but Jesus loves thee bestGood-
night I
Good-night I
Good-night !
”
It is said that the early Christians were accustomed to bid theirdying friends “ 
Good-night,” so sure were they of their awakening onthe resurrection morning. That does not mean that they have ceasedto exist. They are existing in a realm where He is in authority, andwhere His voice can be heard ;
and being heard they will obey.

Do not forget the solemn words. ”
The hour cometh, and now is,
when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God ;
.. .
all that 
are in the tombs shall hear His voice, and shall come forth ;
they thathave done good, unto the resurrection of life ;
and they that havedone ill, unto the resurrection of judgment.” When He spoke toMartha He said, “
I am the resurrection, and the life ;
he that believeth 
on Me, though he die, yet shall he live.” Lazarus is in the tomb, but“
though he die, yet shall he live.“

Here is another very familiar word of Scripture which we mayoften quote correctly but think inaccurately. Jesus did not say, “
Yet 
shall he live again.” No, not “
again,” but “
yet shall he live.” Jesus 
said plainly, Lazarus is dead, but he is not dead. He is where Myvoice can reach him. He is asleep, unconscious of all the things hehas been conscious of ;
but I can find him, I can reach him ;
and there 
will come a day when My voice will reach all that are in the tombs.
So we say to our loved ones,

 
Sleep on, beloved, sleep, and take thy rest.” 
292
PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

59. A Grain of Wheat 
John xii :
20-26
WE FIND ourselves now in the last hours of our Lord’s publicministry. As we follow the records, the incident recorded in this 
paragraph (xii. 20-26)
is the last of which we have any record in the 
public work of Jesus. Preceding this incident there had been His 
entry to Jerusalem, and His conflict with the rulers. At the end ofthat conflict there had shone upon Him that gleam of light as the poorwidow, passing the treasury, had shown her devotion to the God of herfathers as she cast in all her living. Then it was that the Greeks came. 
We should note that these were Greeks, not Greek Jews. There is a 
distinction clearly seen by the reader of the Greek New Testamentbetween Hellenes, and Hellenistes. These were Hellenes-Greeks. 
Immediately after this incident we have the chapters thirteen toseventeen, in which we see Jesus alone with His own, the world shut 
out. At the close of that period with His own, He crossed the brookKidron,
and the end came. This is but to remind us of the atmospherethat necessarily demands careful thought and attention.
We are considering now this parabolic illustration that our Lordused in connection with the coming of the Greeks, taking our usualmethod, enquiring first, what the subject was He intended to illustrate 
;
then looking carefully at the figure He employed to illustrate 
His subject ;
in order that we may consider the teaching that isdeduced. 
What made Jesus use this illustration ? John records that He 
began by that formula, which shows He intended to draw specialattention to what He was going to say, “ 
Verily, verily.” When 
Andrew and Philip came and proffered the request to Him, telling Himwhat the Greeks were saying, He said, “
The hour is come that the 
Son of man should be glorified. VeriIy,
verily, I say unto you, Excepta grain of wheat fall into the earth and die, it abideth by itself alone;
but if it die, it beareth much fruit.” Patently that was a parabolicillustration, but of what ?
We start with that question.
We cannot understand this except we notice why the Greeks came.
That may be difficult to see, except by general deduction and consideration. 
I venture therefore to take that general consideration,
and make a deduction. These were Greeks, Hellenes. The word marks 
them as to race and nationality. If they were Greeks, not HellenisticJews, they were Greek proselytes to the Jewish faith, because Johndistinctly tells us they had come up to worship at the feast. Weknow full well that there were at that time very many who, from othernations and other peoples and races and religions, turned towardsthe Hebrew religion, and became proselytes of the gate, definitely
A GRAIN OF WHEAT 
accepting Jewish ritual and the Jewish law, and the Jewish view of 
God. There is no doubt these Greeks were of that number, and they 
had come up to worship at the feast.

What made them ask to see Jesus ? The first self-evident answer 
is, He was being talked about. Men everywhere were talking about 
Him. The thronging crowds gathering to the feast were all, sooner 
or later, talking about Him. His fame had gone out everywhere, and 
the things He had been saying were well known. Many had receivedwhat He had said, and had been obedient, and were enrolled among 
the number of His disciples, who were more than twelve. After His 
resurrection, five hundred brethren went up to Galilee to meet Him ;
and there were multitudes who had been so influenced. Everyone 
knew something about Jesus ;
and these Greeks, coming up to the 
feast, would hear about Him. 

Now we come to the point where we cannot be definitely dogmatic. 
It may be their coming was one of curiosity. They had heard about 
this wonderful Teacher, about the strange supernatural things He 
had done, of healing all manner of disease, and cleansing the lepers, 
and all the wonders of His work. They may have thought they would 
like to look at Him, and to have a conversation with Him. That may 
all be true ;
but the whole method of the answer of Jesus makes me 
believe there was something far more profound in it than that. I see 
men who had turned from paganism to God, in the Hebrew religion. 
That is the first thing. There is no doubt about that. Tired of the 
hollow, the base, the untrue in the religions in which they had been 
brought up, all the multiplied religions of the land to which they 
belonged. These Greeks, for very weariness of heart and soul, had 
gone to the Hebrew religion with its one God, the living God. Here 
they were, at the feast, keeping the law and observing the ritual, they 
had come up with the multitudes to worship. I believe they had 
become not merely disappointed with their pagan religion, but dis
illusioned in the matter of Judaism. These men seeking after God, 

seeking after the truth, longing to find it, had turned from idols to the 

living God. Then they heard about a Teacher, and they felt there 

was something in what they had heard, something different, something 

higher, something nobler. They were finding out Judaism was not 

satisfying the deepest hunger of their souls. So they found their way 

to the place where Jesus was that day with His disciples all round 

about Him ;
and got hold of that delightful man, Philip, who Elvet 

Lewis long ago said was a man always on the edge of the crowd, 

never obtrusive, but ready to lead others to his Master. It may be

these Greeks were attracted to him because he bore a Greek name. 

But they proffered their request, and said, Sir, we want to see Jesus.

What a world of meaning there was in that. I think they were honest 

and sincere. 
So the human desire lay at the back of what Jesus said. The 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

desire was shared by His disciples. They were a little hesitant about 
it. They held a splendid committee meeting, splendid because it only 
consisted of two, that is, Philip and Andrew. They got together. 
Mark the psychology of this. Philip knew that something was about 
to happen. He had been with the disciples during these six months 
in which Jesus had been telling them distinctly that He was going to 
die. At any rate Philip knew that his Master was occupied with great 
thinking and great sorrow ;
and therefore he wondered whether he 
ought to trouble Him. So he went to Andrew. We are not told of any 
discussion. It was a good committee meeting, in which they did not 
waste any time. They both went to Jesus and told Him of the request. 
I think they were anxious that these Greeks should see Him, men 
of another religion and nation to see their Lord and Master. They 
wanted them to hear Him because they were of a wider realm. There 
is human desire on the part of the enquiring Greeks, and on the part 
of the disciples. To that Jesus answered, and the figure of speech 
He used was intended to illuminate and illustrate what He said in 
reply to that enquiry and request of the Greeks. 

What then made Him say what He said ?
Notice the first thing 
He said, “
The hour is come, that the Son of man should be glorified.” 
There we have a full stop. I wish there was not, because we are 
inolined
to stop there. Because of that it has been suggested by some 
brilliant expositors that Jesus knew the Hebrew people were rejecting 
Him, and now He saw the Gentile world opening before Him, and 
therefore He said, the hour is come that the Son of man should be 
glorified, because the Gentile world was now enquiring, and were 
coming to Him. I hold that is utterly wrong, and there is no warrant 
for it. Go back over the Gospel, and notice the repeated references 
to the “ 
hour.” The first reference is when He was talking to His 
mother Mary at Cana.
She had come to Him, hoping that He would 
work a wonder by which His glory would be revealed, and He said, 
the hour had not come. What did He mean then ?
That He would 
not perform the miracle ?
No, for immediately He did what she had 
asked. He told her that His glory would not be seen through the 
wonder of the miracle He worked, for His hour was not yet come. 
That hour was referred to again and again, but always as postponed. 
When the Greeks came and said, We want to see Jesus ;
He said, 
”
The hour is come that the Son of man should be glorified ;
verily, 
verily, I say unto you, Except a grain of wheat fall into the earth and 
die, it abideth by itself alone.” That is the answer. Do not stop with 
the full stop at the word ”
glorified ”
in your thinking. How is the 
Son of man glorified ?
How has the hour come ?
What is the hour ?
“
Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except a grain of wheat fall into the 
earth and die, it abideth by itself alone.” Our Lord was speaking 
out of His own consciousness. He knew that He was not seen, and 
could not be seen, as He then stood before His disciples and those 

A GRAIN OF WHEAT 

Greeks. He meant that they would only see Him in one way. He 
might have said to Philip and Andrew, You have not seen Me. But
they had !
They had been with Him for three and a half years. NO, 
He said, You have never seen Me. 

Turn on to the fourteenth chapter. He is talking to the group,
and Philip is there, and says, “
Show us the Father ”
;
and He said, 
“
Have I been so long time with you, and dost thou not know Me, 
Philip ?
”
He had not known Him, had not seen Him, and none of 
them had. When He heard the Greeks had asked to see Him, H e 
declared that the hour was come in which the thing would be possible. 
The hour is come in which the Son of man should be glorified. What 
is the hour ?
“
Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except a grain of wheat 
fall into the earth and die, it abideth by itself alone.” That is what 
He was illustrating. We find as we listen to Him, His clear understanding 
of the only way by which He could be revealed in all the 
fulness and meaning of Himself, and the only way in which men could 
ever see Him truly, and know Him. That is what He intended to 
illustrate. 

This incident moves in exactly the same realm as His great soliloquy 
recorded by Luke alone. In the midst of all the difficulties of His 
ministry, one day He burst out in these words :
“
I came to cast fire 
upon the earth ;
and what do I desire, would that it were already 
kindled 1
But I have a baptism to be baptized with ;
and how am 
I straitened till it be accomplished !
”
The same thing. Now let 
Me tell you what that hour will be, as though Jesus had said, and 
let Me show you what that hour will be. I will do it by taking asimple illustration :
“
Except a grain of wheat fall into the earthand die, it abideth by itself alone ;
but if it die, it beareth much 
fruit.” 

Pause now with the figure itself. What is this figure our Lord 
used ?
“
A corn of wheat ”
said the Old Version. “
A grain of wheat”
says the Revised. Either will do to explain the word He made use of. 
What is a kernel of wheat ?
One single grain, a seed. Take a seed 
of wheat, a corn of wheat, a grain of wheat. Jesus said, There are 
conditions under which any grain of wheat abides alone. But if that 
grain of wheat is planted, and it dies, and we watch, we shall see first 
the blade, and then the ear, and then the full corn in the ear. The 
one lonely grain has been multiplied into full corn in the ear, to borrow 
His words on another occasion, some a hundred-fold, some sixty, 
some thirty, because that grain of wheat has been dropped into theground and died. 

He is illustrating a tremendous truth concerning Himself. Take 
hold of the figure in simplicity. Imagine that you hold a grain of wheat
in your
hand, a little thing; the husk is on it, but inside the husk is 
the grain, and the scientists can tell you all the things that are in it. 
But while you look at that grain, you cannot really see it. Oh yes, 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

you say, there it is. Philip and Andrew could see Jesus. There He 
was. The enquiring Greeks could see Jesus. There He was. The grain 
of wheat, can I see it ?
Yes, but I cannot see its meaning. I cannot 
see its possibilities. I cannot see what really lies potentially within 
the little grain. 

Would I really see it ?
Very well then ;
put it in the ground. 
Then you will have to stand aside. All you can see of it is that it 
dies. We have to see that. Then presently the blade, the ear, the fullcorn, thirty- sixty- a hundred-fold in the ear. But they were all in 
the little grain you looked at, that was sown. It is not done. Husk 
it. Get those grains out, thirty, sixty, a hundred ;
and so the process 
is running on. Whether it is quite permissible or not, I cannot help 
remembering something in the Old Testament, 

“
There shall be an handful of corn in the earth upon the topof the mountains ;
The fruit thereof shall shake like Lebanon.” 

The harvest from a grain. We cannot see it, when we see the grain. 
“
We would see Jesus ”
;
and in great wisdom and perfect understanding 
He saw they could see Him, but they could not see Him. They 
could only really see Him as He fell and died ;
that out of that death 
of His there should spring life, the life that multiplied, life that grew 
until the harvests should be gathered in. He would be seen in that 
way, and that way alone. 

So we may gather up the general teaching. The Lord applied the 
principle generally as a philosophy after He had given the illustration, 
when in the twenty-fifth verse He said, “
He that loveth his life loseth
it.” If he love it, hold it and nurse it and care for it, he is losing it. 
“ 
He that hateth his life in this world,” lays it down in self-denial 
and abnegation, to death, he shall hold it, “
shall keep it unto 
the life eternal.” That is the great principle contained in His 
illustration. 

He went on and applied it immediately to His disciples. “
If anyman serve Me, let him follow Me.” Where was He going ? He was 
going to the Cross. Where was He going ? He was going to resurrection 
and triumph. Where was He going ?
The grain of wheat was 
going to fall into the ground and die. Where was He going ? Through 
that death life should spring, and harvests should result. “
If any 
man serve Me, let him follow Me,” and accept that principle. Whether 
by dying or living, “
where I am, there shall also My servant be ;
if 
any man serve Me, him will the Father honour.” 

Then He applied it to Himself. “ 
Now is My soul troubled.” The 
hour is come, “
and what shall I say ?
Father, save Me from this 
hour ?
”
Shall I ask God to deliver Me from this hour of the death of 
the grain of wheat ?
He did not ask that. “ 
Father, glorify Thy name.” 
That was the supreme passion of His heart. Follow through the 

THE WASHING OF FEET 
teaching, and He clearly shows how He was passing through trouble

to triumph, through death to life, through suffering to glory. It is 

Christ seen in glory Who is speaking in life through death, in triumph 

through trouble that the Christ is seen at all. No, they cannot see 

Me yet, but they shall see Me ;
for as the corn of wheat, so I will pass 

into death, and out of that death will come new life. 

So from infinite mystery so profound, all wrapped in the flesh 

Divine of the Son of man, that men did not see the glory, He came to 

manifestation through death and through life. 

60. The Washing of Feet 
John xiii
:
I-II 

W
W
E HAVE no parable, nor parabolic illustration in this paragraph ;
but we have the record of a parabolic action on the part 
of our Master. Our Lord’s application of what He did shows that 
He intended it to be an illustration in action, and so a parabobc
illustration. 

It occurs in this wonderful section of John’s record in which our 
Lord is seen at the end of His public ministry alone with His own 
disciples. All the public teaching was over, and the works wrought 
in the sight of the multitudes had ceased. He had gathered around 
Him that first little band whom He had chosen to be with Him, and 
that He might send forth in His name. Through these chapters 
(xiii.-xvii.) there was no stranger there. Jesus was alone with His 
own. There were thirteen men there ;
our Lord Himself, and twelve 
others. Very soon the number was reduced. As a matter of fact, this 
very parabolic action led to the exclusion of Judas. 

We give attention then to the action in itself, and proceed first to 
ask, What was our Lord intending to illustrate in His action on this 
memorable occasion ?
Then we will examine the figure revealed in 
the action, and which He thus employed for teaching His own. Finally 
we seek to gather for ourselves the teaching that lies within it. 

What was the subject He was illustrating ?
We have a remarkable 
glimpse here in the beginning, of the mind of the Lord Himself, His 
consciousness, the matters that were possessing His thought, andhaving their influence upon all He said, and all He did. That mind 
is remarkably revealed in the opening words of the chapter, “
Now 
before the feast of the Passover, Jesus knowing.” That is repeated 
in verse three, “ 
Jesus knowing.” We are told of two things, all He 
did, and all He said on this occasion. Consequently we are approaching 
an understanding of what He intended to illustrate, as we recognize 
His own mind, His own consciousness. 

298
PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

What did He know ?
First, that His hour was come that He should 
depart out of the world unto the Father. I am not concerned with 
what follows, although it is important. John here emphasizes the 
consciousness of Christ at the time. That was the supreme thing, the 
first thing, that He knew that His hour was come. What hour ?
That 
“ 
He should depart out of this world unto the Father.” The consciousness 
of Christ is marvellously revealed to us, and the merging 
in it of His knowledge of all that lay before Him, all the terror that 
was in front of Him, and yet the consciousness of triumph through 
the terror. He knew His hour was come when the Greeks came. 
He then said “
The hour is come that the Son of man should be glorified.” 
Now the hour was come, The Greeks could only see Him as 
He went down into death, and came out again in resurrection power, 
as the grain of wheat falls into the ground and dies. Now, He knew 
that the hour was come that He should depart out of the world. With 
all reverence, by way of interpretation, He knew how He was to depart 
out of the world. He had been telling His disciples for six months over 
and over again of the method of His going. They, dear souls, had been 
frightened. Now He knew that the hour had come, and He knew the 
method of it, He knew the issue of it. Yes, He was departing out of 
the world, but where was He going ? To the Father, and the note of 
perfect assurance and victory is there. That is one thing He knew. 

What was the other thing that John says He knew ?
I am not 
concerned with the immediate application of it, but with the general 
stating. He knew that “
the Father had given all things into His 
hands, and that He came forth from God, and goeth unto God.” There 
was the consciousness that His hour was come, and there was the 
certain consciousness of His own authority, which He had received 
from His Father. “ 
All things were delivered into His hands.” We 
look at Him, and as we look we wonder. All things ?
Just beyond is 
the Cross, when He was delivered into the hands of sinful men, That 
is only the surface outlook. All things were delivered into His hands, 
and He knew that ;
and He knew that He had come from God, and 
was going to God. So the lights and glories as of the Urim and Thummim 
on the breastplate of the priest in the olden days flash through this ;
the mind of Christ. That is the background. But what else is here ? 
We have the background of the disciples, those who were round about 
Him, and of all that had been happening amongst them during the 
previous six months to which we have referred already. Ponder againcarefully those last six months, from Caesarea 
Philippi, and Peter’s 
confession and the Cross. Do not forget He had never explicitly told 
them He was going to the Cross till then ;
but from that moment 
there was a feeling of estrangement. They could not understand. I 
am not criticizing them. We should not have understood ;
and they 
did not. We find over and over again our Lord told them about His 
Cross, took them aside to tell them, and to tell them carefully in detail ;
THE WASHING OF FEET 

and in every case we find these two startling facts, that He never toldthem about His Cross but that He also mentioned His resurrection ;
and also that in every case, immediately after His emphasizing of HisCross, they were disputing, quarrelling as to who was the greatest.
There they were, men thinking about their own pre-eminence, and theirown positions of power ;
and there is a sense in which that was all
permissible, and yet it was entirely self-centred. Who is the greatest?
In that Kingdom who shall have the position of power, and two menthought they ought to have it, and got their mother to speak for them.
It is a way mothers have sometimes I
When they had done this, theten were angry with them for having done it, and the reason was theten were angry because they wanted the position themselves. Thatis not being unkind to them. There is the background. Jesus knewwhat was in their hearts, and by that symbolic action, that parabolicaction, the subject illustrated was first the heart of the Lord Himself,
that those men might see Him by a simple act, yet so sublime, thatit holds us in its thrall
to-day. Therefore in order that they mightunderstand what was the true responsibility of their discipleship, thesubject illustrated in this parabolic action was the heart of theLord, and the responsibilities consequent upon discipleship to thatLord. 

Now the figure itself. What was this that Jesus did ?
Verse ten. 
”
Jesus saith to Peter, He that is bathed needeth not save to wash hisfeet, but is clean every whit ;
and ye are clean, but not all.” I am 
not now concerned with the last part of the verse. “
He that is bathed 
needeth not save to wash his feet.” The Authorized Version renders 
this, “
He that is washed needeth not save to wash his feet.” The 
Revised Version has the word “
bathed,” ”
He that is bathed.” I 
think the word “
bathed ”
is better, for there are two Greek verbsthere, which give us in a flash
the picture behind this, and the thingJesus was using as an illustration. The first of the Greek verbs rendered 
“
washed ”
in the Authorized, and now rendered “
bathed ”
in the 
Revised, is a verb that means just that, to bathe the whole person, theverb Cuuo
;
whereas the verb nipto
is to cleanse the hands or feet, thatis, wash, and it is distinct from bathing. Jesus said to Peter, He thatis bathed only needs to wash his feet ;
and in a moment the Eastern 
habits are revealed. To bathe meant complete cleansing, and thepicture behind this is that of a man having been to the baths, andcompletely bathed, taking his way home through the dust of the highway, 
contracting dust upon his feet, and when he reaches home he willcleanse his feet from defilement contracted after he has bathed. That 
is an Eastern figure, and all would be familiar with it as Jesus said,
“
He that is bathed needeth not save to wash his feet.” After the 
complete cleansing of the bath, that does not need to be repeated;
but he does need to be cleansed from any defilement as
he walks bythe way. That is what our Lord was illustrating. So He said to them, 

3oo
PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

YOU are all clean. You have all been bathed, but you may ha-.v
contracted 
defilement in your walk. The figure of speech was anEasteis
one of the bath and the foot-washing.

Look at the story once more, and observe what Jesus did. Theaction must have been very arresting to those men, because it musthave been something entirely unusual. To wash the feet of these men 
sitting round the board was a most unusual procedure. Notice thestatement of verse two, which is open to different meanings, two alternatives 
” 
during supper.” In verse four we are told, knowing thesethings, He “ 
riseth from supper, and layeth aside His garments.”
What He did, He did then, “ 
He riseth from supper.” The alternative 
is that during the meal He did this ;
or at the close He did it, and notat first. It is difficult for the Western mind to see the unusualness of 
this action. This was not the close of a journey, when they constantlybrought water to wash away the dust of the highway. There wereconstant ceremonial washings of the feet before the meal. Here it was 
not at the close of a journey, or specifically before a meal. It was either 
during a meal or at its close. This is important. He suddenly arose,
and laying aside His garments, He took a towel and girded Himself,
poured water into a basin, and began to wash the disciples’ feet. The 
particular description of that unusual procedure would immediatelyarrest their special attention. What could it mean that the One Who 
was practically the Host, suddenly in the midst of the meal, or whenit was over, did what men usually did before a meal, or after ajourney?
What was He doing ?
He said to them, Do you know what I havedone ?
They did not understand. Then He explained, and we seeto the heart of it. There was the supreme and wonderful revelationof His heart to those men. Two were there, Judas and Jesus, and the 
heart of Judas was Satan inspired by hatred, as the result of Satanicaction, a determination to betray. In the heart of Jesus there was 
the passion to serve, and to serve in self-emptying action. WatchHim. He riseth, He girdeth Himself, He washeth. What is that7
Girding meant far more in the East. The towel was the badge ofslavery. It was the slave who was girded about the loins with a towelof homespun or common material. Jesus, taking a towel, laying asideHis garments, girded Himself, drew it around Him, and took theattitude of a slave, and did the slave’s work. Taking a basin, andpouring water, He carried the basin and knelt in the attitude of a slave.
Whether Peter was the first, I will not argue ;
but supposing he was,
He knelt down at Peter’s feet, and began, as a slave would do, to washthe feet of the disciples. When Peter protested, Jesus said, “
If I wash 
thee not, thou hast no part with Me.” I love to read his answer, after 
his protest, ”
Lord, not my feet only, but also my hands and
my 
head.” 

Turn over to one of the letters Peter wrote. “
Yea, all of you gird 

THE WASHING OF FEET 

yourselves with humility, to serve one another ;
for God resisteth the 

proud, but giveth grace to the humble” (I Pet. v. 5).
Yes, Peter came 

to understand. He came to know that in that hour he saw into the 

very heart of Jesus. There was the outshining of the grace of God 

in the marvel of that action. He emptied Himself, He humbled

Himself, He bent. He was their Lord and Master. They called Him

that. He was their Teacher and their Lord. He said, You are quite

right. I am your Teacher, I am your Lord. But what is the Teacher

doing now ?
What is the sovereign Lord of all authority doing now?
Behold Him a slave, doing a slave’s work to His disciples, and observe

the heart of Jesus. So the parabolic action was a revelation of His 

grace.

It was more. It was the shining of His glory. There is the grace,

but there is also the glory. That knotted towel was the badge of

slavery ;
but here is the remarkable fact that the knotted garment

was also the insignia of princes ;
with the very same method of fasten
ing and tying. The difference was in material ;
for the slave a rough

homespun cloth ;
for princes purple or gold. I think back through

the years ;
and John saw in that girdle not only the badge of slavery,

but the girdle of kingship. We do not forget when he was in Patmos,

and he had a vision of this Self-same One in all His glory, in that

marvellous description he has given, among other things he wrote,

“ 
girt about at the breasts with a golden girdle.” Yes, he saw that

in Patmos, and looking back he saw the sackcloth of the slave trans
muted into the glory and purple of sovereignty.

No, said Jesus, you do not understand now, but you will some day.
That is what He was showing forth ;
the transfiguration of serviceat the lowest to sovereignty at the highest.

Then He applied it in words we have already referred to. “
If I 
then, the Lord and Master, have washed your feet, ye ought also towash one another’s feet.” What does it mean ?
He knew that in the 
walk of those who were cleansed by the bathing there would be thecontraction of defilement ;
and they would need the washing of thefeet. He said, You have seen Me do it ; you ought also to be readyto do it for each other. Paul was writing to the Galatian Christiansand he said this (vi. I), “
Brethren, even if a man be overtaken inany trespass, ye which are spiritual, restore such an one in a spiritof meekness, Iest thou also be tempted.” What our Lord was sayingto His fellow-disciples was, I know the way, all along this pilgrimagecleansed men will contract defilement. When your brother does, yourbusiness is not to emphasize the defilement, not to turn to your brotherthe cold shoulder of pride and indifference. Your business is toattempt to wash his feet, to restore such an one, as Paul says, in thespirit of meekness. As we do that, the grace of our Lord Jesus Christshines out, and the glory of the triumph of love is manifested in usand through us. 

302
PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

61. The Father’s House and Many Mansions 
John xiv: 2-6 

T
T
HIS PARABOLIC illustration our Lord employed while still in conversation 
with His own, in those final and intimate hours before 
He passed to His Cross. Immediately after the parabolic action of the 
washing of the disciples’ feet Judas was excluded. He then referred 
to His going once more, and told them quite plainly, “
Whither I go, 
ye cannot come.” That statement of our Lord led to discussion. 
Only four men spoke, and our Lord answered them ;
Peter, Thomas, 
Philip, and Jude. In the course of His replies occurs this symbolic 
illustration. 

This is a very familiar passage. I have said these words are parabolic, 
and they were intended to illustrate ;
“ 
In My Father’s house 
are many mansions.” Following our custom in these studies we consider 
first the subject He was illustrating, which is of importance ;
then we look particularly at the figure He employed, in order that we 
may deduce the teaching from the utterance itself. 

The background here is so necessary. We saw that when dealing 
with the washing of the disciples’ feet. Again it is important here. 
We must bear in mind that strangely perplexing hour for the disciples. 
Evidence of it comes out in the things they said to Him when He 
told them He was going. They could not understand “
Whither I go, 
ye cannot come.” We are familiar with what happened. Peter said, 
Where art Thou going ?
Thomas said, We do not know where Thou 
art going, how can we know the way ?
Philip said, “
Show us the 
Father, and it sufficeth us.” Jude said, ”
What is come to pass thatThou wilt manifest Thyself unto us, and not unto the world ? ”
Their 
perplexity is self-evident. 

But observe that all these questions or words spoken by these 
four representative men, were concerned with spiritual matters. Peter 
knew that Jesus was going to death. He had been told that again 
and again for six months, Now they knew perfectly well His enemies 
were waiting for Him, and that He was going to death. When Peter 
said, Where are You going ?
“
Whither goest Thou ? ”
he was peering 
out into the unknown mysterious spaces. Jesus answered him, 
and in the course of that answer He employed the words we are 
looking at. 

Go on to Thomas. If Peter was trying to visualize a destination, 
Thomas, not knowing the destination, was perplexed about the way. 
How can we know the way, if we do not know where You are going ?
Jesus replied to him. 

Then Philip, that quiet, unobtrusive soul, who thought great and 
profound things, and did not talk much about them, blurted out the 

THE FATHER’S HOUSE AND MANY MANSIONS 303 

whole of the agony of humanity, “
Show us the Father, and it sufficeth 
us.” 
Then Jude, facing the practical present, asked his question. He

looked round about the world again, and faced the practical issue

of it all. Let us recognize that their immediate earthly trouble was

earthly. They were losing Him. After three and a half years in His

close company, travelling
here and there ;
watching Him, listening

to Him ;
now He is going ;
they are going to be left. That was their 

trouble. 

Yet it was quite evident from everything that He had been saying

to them He was going forward with majesty. There was no cringing.

He told them He was going to suffer. He told them He was going

to die. He told them He was going to resurrection. They never seem

to have grasped the fact of the resurrection.

So we look at them, perplexed and fearful. The earth was so real, 
it was there ;
their feet were planted on it. They were living in it.
They were breathing its surrounding atmosphere, and seeing its hillsand its valleys, its lakes and its rivers. While He was there it was so 
real, and after all was said and done the beyond was unknown and 
uncertain. I do not think any of them were Sadducees
but Pharisees, 
prior to their capture by Jesus, and they believed in the Spirit, and the 
spirit world, and the life beyond. They were not satisfied with a merely 
moral and ethical code ;
but they were not clear about the beyond ;
what did lie beyond, “
Whither goest Thou ?
”
They wanted to know 
the destination, wherever it may be in the far-flung spaces of the 
universe. How are men going to get there ? We do not know the 

destination. We do not know the route. What is the way ?
said 
Thomas, and there seems to have been in the mind of Philip, perhapsin the sense of all of them, whatever the destination, whatever theroute that led to it, the ultimate was God. He said “
Show us the 
Father, and it sufficeth us.” Then Jude, a little more practical forthe moment than the rest, asked how the things they had seen shouldbe manifested to the world. 

It was in the midst of His reply to these words of Peter He said,
“
Whither I go, thou canst
not follow Me now, but thou shalt followafterwards.” Peter then replied, “
Lord, why cannot I follow Thee 
even now ?
I will lay down my life for Thee.” He never said a finer 
thing, and he meant it. Our Lord replied, “
Wilt thou lay down thylife for Me ?
Verily, verily, I say unto thee, The cock shall not crow,
till thou hast denied Me thrice. Let not your heart be troubled ;
yebelieve in God, believe also in Me. In My Father’s house are manymansions.” That is where He was going. “
If it were not so, I wouldhave told you ;
for I go to prepare a place for you. And if I go andprepare a place for you, I come again, and
will receive you untoMyself.
So we come to the figure itself. He was illuminating that whole 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

304
thinking of theirs. They were in the presence of ineffable sorrow at 
His departure. They would be here in the world wondering. They 
would not be able to talk to Him, and to watch His deeds. He will be 
gone, whither ?
It was in answer to that wonder that He used this 
illustration. 

What was the figure He employed ?
“ 
In My Father’s house are 
many mansions.” “ 
House,“ the simple word for a dwelling-place, a 
place of abode. Do not dismiss it by the use of the word simple. I t 
is far more than simple. It was the word O&OS,
house. They all lived 
in houses. The dwelling-place is the simple meaning of it. He said 
in the house of My Father there are many mansions. “ 
Mansions.” 
The word has unfortunate connotations. Some people think the house 
is a villa residence. Some people have sung about the mansions over 
yonder. What is this word “
mansions ”
? It is the word ozone,
which 
means simply an abode. The verb meno
is a common word in the 
New Testament ;
but the word mone is not, only occurring here and in 
one other place, in verse twenty-three ;
both times from the lips of 
Jesus. “ 
In My Father’s house are many mansions ”
;
“
We will 
come .
.. and make Our abode with him.” So we have a double 
idea here, and we see at once that the term “
house ”
is inclusive. I 
prefer to use for that the word “ 
dwelling-place,” and for the word 
“ 
mansions,” “ 
abiding-places.” That may not help us very much. 
Yet I would read it in that way. “ 
In My Father’s dwelling-place 
there are many abiding-places.” The dwelling-place is greater than 
the abiding-places. All the abiding-places are in the dwelling-place. 
The great word there is “ 
My Father‘s house,” and the secondary, the 
subsidiary, is the “ 
abiding-place.”

What was He talking about ?
What was He intending to teach 
when He used this figure of speech ?
Let us begin on the level of 
the evident and commonplace. Twice in the course of the ministry ofour Lord He made use of that phrase, “ 
My Father’s house.” The first 
is in the second chapter of this Gospel. When He was cleansing the 
Temple, He said “ 
My Father’s house,” There He was referring to 
the temple. He said it here, “ 
In My Father’s house are many mansions.” 
The first figure is that of the temple itself. He referred to the 
temple as “the house of God” on other occasions. He called it the house 
in God in Matthew (xii. 4). He spoke of it as His own house, assuming 
the place of God. At the terrible end He referred to the temple not 
as My Father’s house, or My house, but “
your house is left unto you 
desolate.” His references were all to the temple. 

Let us be content to spend time with the simplicities of this. Go 
back and look at the temple. He was familiar with it, and often went 
into it. We have accounts of His having been in three parts of the 
temple. At the feast of tabernacles He was in the treasury. At the 
feast of dedication He was in Solomon’s porch. In the case of the 
widow He was over against the treasury, sitting there. 

THE FATHER’S HOUSE AND MANY MANSIONS 305
What was the temple like ?
It has often been described as it 
existed then. It was in process of building. It was not finished until 
ten years after the crucifixion of Jesus. There it was, a wonderfulbuilding. A quotation from Jerusalem by George Adam Smith mayhelp us to see it.

‘
Herod
temple consisted of a house divided like its predecessorinto the Holy of Holies,
and the Holy Place ;
a porch ;
an
immediate 
forecourt with an altar of burnt offering ;
a Court of Israel ;
in front 
of this a Court of Women ;
and round the whole of the preceding aCourt of the Gentiles.” 

Again,

“
Chambers for officials, and a meeting-place for the Sanhedrim.
Against the walls were built side-chambers, about thirty-eight in all.”
The temple was a house. There were many abiding-places in it.1
believe that that temple, as a figure of speech and symbol, was in themind of our Lord when He said, ‘
In My Father’s house there are manyabiding-places.”

But it is equally certain that He saw the temple in its true significance, 
and understood its symbolism. Go back to the first words 
about the construction of that temple, in Exodus. “
And let them 
make Me a sanctuary ;
that I may dwell among them.” He saw itas the house of God. Later, the writer of the letter to the Hebrews,
referring to the tabernacle, which was the true pattern after all, said,
“
All things were made according to the pattern that wasshewed
thee in the mount.” Again, all those things were ‘
copies of the thingsin the heavens.” Once more, “
made with hands, like in pattern tothe true.” 

So that temple was patterned after things in the heavens. “
In 
the beginning God created the heavens and the earth.” When readnext do not think merely of that wonderful stretch of sky some nightwhen the moon is at the full, and the stars are out, a more wonderfulsight than in the day; but all the ultimate beauty is seen in the heavens.
That temple, that tabernacle, and all the account of it is there, isaccording to the copy of things in the heavens ;
and it was called the 
house of God. It had many parts, many sections, many places, allhaving their value, all
having their place. I am not so much concerned 
with the temple as with the tabernacle of old. It was a copy. “
In 
my Father’s house are many mansions.” As though He had said, Yougo up to the temple, and you go into many parts and divisions and 
rooms. There are many abiding-places in the house.

Then of what was He talking to them ?
What was the meaningof it all ?
To those men questing after the beyond, and yet earthbound 
in their vision and thinking, He was going. They said, WhenHe is gone we have lost Him ;
and He gave them the universe in aflash, “ 
My Father’s house.” In that whole universe there are manyabiding-places. This earth is one, but it is not the only one. All the 

20
306
PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

symbolism of the tabernacle breaks down in the presence of the vast
ness of the universe. There are many abiding-places, and He was 

showing them that He was merely leaving one abiding-place in the 

house to go to another. They could not go then, but they should go;
and He was going to another abiding-place within the house. What 

for 1
To prepare a place for them. 

What a wonderful expression that is, “ 
To prepare a place for you.” 

Somewhere out in the house of God, that vastness that baffles us, 

somewhere, that we cannot understand, He is going there to get a 

place fully furnished for you. How does He do it ?
By being there. 

As though He said to them, You will come presently, and when you 

come you will be at home because you will find Me there, somewhere 

in the Father’s house, He did not tell them the locality. He did not 

tell them what they wanted to know, some description of locality. 

He said, It is all in the Father’s house. There are many abiding-
places. He was going to prepare a place for them, and He would come 

again and receive them. 

What wonderful things are written that have their bearing here. 

Take one or two quotations. Go back to Solomon’s time when he 

had built his temple, and was offering that marvellous prayer. He 

said, “
But will God in very deed dwell on the earth ? Behold, heaven 

and the heaven of heavens cannot contain Thee ;
how much less this 

house that I have builded.” If we would know the meaning of the 

phrase “ 
My Father’s house,” we have it there suggestively, “
the 

heaven ”
and “ 
the heaven of heavens.” 

In close connection we turn to the prophet Isaiah. He says this,

“
For thus s&h
the high and lofty One that inhabiteth eternity, 

Whose name is Holy ;
I dwell in the high and holy place, with him 

also that is of a contrite spirit ;
and that trembleth at My word.” 

The house of God, eternity, the whole universe. It is so easy to write,

but we cannot grasp it yet, for it transcends us. 

Let us take another quotation. Stephen in his great defence
said, 
”
Howbeit the Most High dwelleth not in houses made with hands ;
as saith the prophet :
The heaven is My Throne.

And the earth the footstool of My feet;
What manner of house will ye build Me ?
saith the Lord ;
Or what is the place of My restI
Did not My hand make all these things 7 ”
Later on Paul, in that later chapter in the Acts, says, ”
The God that 
made the world and all things therein, He, being Lord of heaven and 
earth, dwelleth not in temples made with hands.” 

No, that is not God’s ultimate dwelling-place. Where is it I
Eternity. 
The Father’s house is the whole of the universe, and in that house 
there are many abiding-places. Earth is one. Jesus said, I am going 

THE VINE 
to leave it, but I am not going outside the house of My Father. It has 
many abiding-places, and it is true of you and me, we are in one of the 
abiding-places, but we are in the Father’s house. The whole universe 
is in that house. The loved ones that have gone from us have simply 
gone into another abiding-place. We cannot go yet, but He is there 
preparing the place ,
*
but it is the vastness of the universe. 

These men on the earth level, earth-bound, questing after the 
beyond, were shown the beyond is here, for this is part of it. We are 
in the Father’s house. He is there with us. He was going to another 
abiding-place to prepare for us, and if He went, He would come again 
and receive us, and we will be there together. Oh the wonder of the 
whole conception !
Thomas said, We do not know where it is. How do we know the 
way ?
He said, “ 
I am the way,” and that includes the universe, the 
part of this universe to which He has been ;
and more than the way, 
“
I am the truth ”
concerning it. All secrets have their final solution 
in Me. I am more, I am the life of the Father’s house. I think Philip 
had got nearer when he said, “
Show us the Father, and it sufhceth 
us.” 
Then mark the marvel of it, ”
He that hath seen Me hath seen the 
Father.” He has not only seen the Father, but has seen all the Father’s 
house, and has come to understand that within that house are many 
abiding-places. We might indulge in many speculations, not profitable. 
We are all so very clever and talk about these planets and stars. 
There was a book written by Mark Twain, not only humorous but 
philosophic, in which he described in his own curious way a man 
searching in the universe for this world. He came across some supernatural 
being out in the infinitudes of space, and asked him the way 
to the world, and the being said, Which world ? to which he replied, 
“ 
The world for which Christ died.” Oh, said the man, He died for 
many worlds. I am not sure he was not right. I know that by His 
Cross He has reconciled all things to Himself in the heavens and on 
the earth. How far that Cross reaches out into the infinite distances 
I do not know ; 
but I know they are within the Father’s house, and 
I know that though He is not here as to bodily presence, He is in the 
Father’s house, and He is getting ready for me. 

62. The Vine 
John xv 

T
T
HE ALLEGORY of the vine and its application is a complete discourse, 
occupying the whole of the fifteenth chapter and the first sixteen 
verses of the sixteenth chapter. This is one complete discourse of 
Jesus, recorded by John, Throughout the Gospel His teaching had 

303
PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

been of the nature of discussions concerning Himself, with His 

enemies, or with His friends. That does not mean they are of 

any less value. Through the background of criticism and opposition 

we have a revelation of how our Lord dealt with it in the days of 

His flesh. 

The circumstances of this particular discourse are familiar. He 

was still with His own. After the conversation with them, resulting 

from the difficulties and enquiries of Peter, Thomas, Philip, and Jude, 

they do seem to have been hushed into silence. Yet directly after
wards, once more discussion arose, that is after this discourse. In 

chap. xvi. verse 17 we have the account of that. “
What is that He 

saith unto us, A little while, and ye behold Me not ;
and again a 

little while, and ye shall see Me ;
and, Because I go unto the Father ? ”
They were puzzled, perplexed. They did not now ask these questions 

of Him, but they were talking, and He knew they were, and He 

answered them. Again we find that there fell upon them evidently 

a very definite silence. 

Before the great allegory of the vine there is evidently a gap 
between the end of the fourteenth chapter and the beginning of the 
fifteenth, where it is said, He said to the disciples, “
Arise, let us go 
hence. ”
I think there can be no doubt that when He said that, they 
arose and left the upper room, and it is an interesting though not 
vital question as to where they went from there. Beyond the great 
intercessory prayer (xvii.) that concludes this section in which He 
had devoted Himself to His own, we read, “
When Jesus had spoken 
these words, He went forth with His disciples over the brook Kidron,
where was a garden ”
(xviii. I), into Gethsemane. 

Where then was this allegory uttered ? That question cannot be 
answered finally. There are varied opinions, but two principal ones. 
Some believe that He took them from the upper room through the 
streets and into the temple. Passover was at hand, and at that time 
the great beautiful gates of the temple were left open all night that 
pilgrims might pass in and out. If He did take them there, as they 
passed through that gate they would see with the light of the Passover 
moon quite likely shining upon it, the national emblem. What was 
it ?
The golden vine. It has been suggested that He spoke by the 
side of those gates, “ 
I am the vine, the true.” I do not know personally, 
I think it is poetically beautiful. Others think He started out 
of the city altogether, and went down towards Kidron,
and somewhere 
there, under God’s sky, He uttered this great allegory. If 
so, wherever they looked, they could see the vines growing all roundthere. 

When we think of these vines we must not think of the vines in this 
country, trained up a wall and growing and spreading, or in glasshouses. We can see them still by acres in California, small vines, little 
vines growing in the open ;
self-contained, every one of them, but 

THE VINE 
growing. If He went out there, and looked at those vines, and said, 
“ 
I am the vine, the true,” there was so much in what He said would 
be illustrated as He spoke. They would see here and there in the 
night, fires burning, in which branches cut out during the day were 
being destroyed. 

He was using the vine as a figure of speech, a parabolic illustration 
in the form of this matchless allegory. We consider then, first, the 
figure of the vine which He employed, that we may deduce the teaching 
which He intended. 

The background is the same as that seen in our last study. Hisdisciples were gathered round Him, perplexed, and fearful of the future 
without Him. He had made it perfectly evident to them, and they 
knew it was true, because of the circumstances pointing to it, that 
they would not have Him with them much longer. He was going away, 
and Peter was troubled. That was the atmosphere ;
but He had just 
made them a remarkable promise. He had said to them, “
I will not 
leave you desolate.” I like to translate that literally, “
I will not leave 
you orphans, I come unto you.” They had heard Him say that. He 
was going, and yet He had told them He would not leave them orphans, 
or desolate, alone, that He would come to them. 

Then He showed them how He would come. He would send 
“ 
Another Comforter.” He would send the Holy Spirit, to use the 
transliteration, the Paraclete, One called to the side of another. We 
have rendered it in two ways, Comforter and Advocate. He is my 
Comforter, He disannuls my orphanage ;
but He is also my Advocate, 
keeping in mind the things He spoke, keeping me alive to their consciousness, 
making His presence a real presence. He had told the 
disciples that. 

Now to look at the figure He used, in order to interpret the new 
relationship with Himself which would be established by the way of 
the coming of the Comforter, the Advocate, the Paraclete, the Holy 
Spirit. The vine illustrates the result of that new life into which they 
were to enter, the new experience they were going to have, of a new 
relationship with Himself. Such then was the subject illustrated. 

Look at the figure of the vine. We cannot go far wrong if we 
stay in the realm of the material vine that bears grapes. But I think 
there was more in it than that when Jesus said, “
I am the vine, the 
true.” In our versions we read, “ 
I am the true vine.” That is not 
inaccurate, but it fails to carry over something which is there. They 
are exactly the same words in the Greek, but they are arranged thus. 
Some Greek scholars may think it is Greek idiom, but I think it is 
more in this case. He said, “ 
I am the vine, the true.” He added to the 
words, “ 
I am the vine,” “
the true ”
;
and that suggests there had been 
things that were false, that were untrue, that had failed ;
and I have 
no doubt that was in His mind when He said, “
I am the vine, the 
true.” 

3x0
PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

Our Lord did not create this figure. He borrowed it, and without 
any hesitation I say that He borrowed it from the Old Testament. 
We find the figure of the vine employed in the Book of Psalms. That 
is the first occurrence (Psalm 80). It is called the psalm of Asaph. 
It was written in a time when God’s people were in trouble as the 
result of their own disobedience, as so constantly they were in trouble. 
He says, 

“
How long wilt Thou be angry against the prayer of Thy people?
Thou hast fed them with the bread of tears, 
And given them tears to drink in large measure.
Thou makest us a strife unto our neighbours.” 

That is the first part of the psalm, 

“
Turn us again, 0 God of hosts;
And cause Thy face to shine, and we shall be saved.” 

Then the singer broke out into this language, 

“
Thou broughtest a vine out of Egypt;
Thou didst drive out the nations, and plantedst it. 
Thou preparedst room before it,
And it took deep root, and filled the land.
The mountains were covered with the shadow of it, 
And the boughs thereof were like cedars of God.
She sent out her branches unto the sea, 
And her shoots unto the River. 
Why hast Thou broken down her fences,
So that all they which pass by the way do pluck her?
The boar out of the wood doth ravage it,
And the wild beasts of the field feed on it. 
Turn again, we beseech Thee, 0 God of hosts;
Look down from heaven, and behold, and visit this vine.” 

The psalm closes with this remarkable passage, 

“
Let Thy hand be upon the man of Thy right hand,

Upon the son of man whom Thou madest strong for Thyself.

So shall we not go back from Thee;
Quicken Thou us, and we will call upon Thy name.” 

Quite evidently the song was born of the failure of the Hebrew people 
at the time ;
it shows their failure, and cries to God. The vine is 
used as the symbol of the nation. That is why they put the golden 
vine on the beautiful gate, and it became from that time the symbol 
of the nation ;
but that is where the figure emerges. 

Turn to Isaiah, and we are farther on in the history of the people. 
In the fifth chapter we have the song of the vineyard. There again 
we have the vine as the symbol of the nation, which God had created 
to bring forth certain fruit, and which was failing. 

THE VINE 311
Again in Jeremiah ii. he speaks of the nation as ”
a degenerate 

vine.” In Ezekiel xv., xvii., xviii. we find three references to the vine 

as symbolizing the nation. It was incarnate in the national thought, 

emblazoned on the gate of the national temple, the symbol of the 

national life. Jesus had said in that temple that the Kingdom of God 

was taken from them, and should be given to those bringing forth 

the fruits thereof. Now, while with His own, He said, ”
I am the vine, 

the true ”
;
victory as against failure ;
realization as against break
down. “ 
I am the vine, the true.” Again, in verse five, “
I am the 

vine, ye are the branches.” Is it possible to conceive of any illustration 

more perfect in setting forth the relationship between Himself and His 

disciples that would be established when He, as to bodily presence, 

was gone ;
and when He would be there in them, and they in Him by 

the coming of the Paraclete ?
Still staying with the figure itself, He said first, “ 
I am the vine.” 
What did He mean ?
We often quote that, and the statement in verse 
five, “ 
I am the vine, ye are the branches.” How do we think of it ? 
We think of the main stem, and the branches growing out of it as a 
picture of Christ and the believers, He the main stem, and we the 
branches. But that is not what He said. He said, “ 
I am the vine,” 
and the vine is not only the main stem. It is part of it, in certain senses 
it may be the principal part of it ;
but that is not the vine. In the vine 
we see diversity :
root, main stem, branches, leaves, tendrils, fruit. I 
am all that, said Christ, I am the vine. In the recognition of diversity 
there,is
a declaration of completeness. The completeness of the vine 
is created by the fact that Christ is all. 

Where then do we come in ?
Does that shut us out ?
Of course 
not. I am everything, said Christ, main stem, branches, everything ;
and you are the branches ;
that is, you are parts of Me. You are as 
closely united to Me in the essentials and entirety of life as those 
branches are in the vine ;
and the vine is incomplete without the 
branches. Our Lord said to these men, Apart from Me, literally, severed 
from Me, cut off from Me, you can do nothing, And He surely also 
meant to say, Apart from you, I can do nothing in this world. I must 
have the branches. 

But see the wonder of that. To these men our Lord said, You are 
going to lose Me, and you are troubled ;
but I am here, I am with 
you, I come again. I come with the coming of the Paraclete. I come 
to you uniting Myself to you so completely that you shah
be part of 
Me, and I part of you ;
for you abide in Me, and I in you. What a 
figure it is !
The first teaching is a recognition of the purpose for which the 
vine exists :
fruit, and fruit-bearing. In Ezekiel we find a parable 
of the vine, in which the prophet tells the men to whom he was talking, 
who probably were proud of their membership in the national life, 
that a vine has no value at all except that of bearing fruit. He tells 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

them the wood is no good. They cannot make a clothes-pin out of 

the wood of the vine. The teaching of Isaiah is in that fifth chapter, 

in the song of the vineyard, that the fruit for which God looked from 

that nation for the world, not for self-consumption, was twofold, 

righteousness and judgment. When Jesus began His ministry, His 

first recorded words spoken to John, were these, “
Thus it becometh 

us to fulfil all righteousness.” At the close, when He was talking, and 

the Greeks had gathered round about Him, He said, “
Now is the 

judgment of this world.” Righteousness and judgment. “
I am 

the vine, the true.” Through Me there shall be borne the fruit for 

which the world waits, and that God expects ;
righteousness and 

judgment. 

You are the branches, the recognition of the true purpose for which 

we are members of Christ, sharing His very nature, and His very life, 

that of fruit-bearing. The figure is that of perfect union. I am the 

vine, everything ;
you are the branches, linked with Me. Severed 

we are useless, only fit for burning ; 
but united, capable of 

bearing the very fruit that God expects, and for which the world 

is waiting. 

We find the conditions He Iaid
down here. They are two. Take 
two words ;
“ 
abide,” and ask.” Perhaps one may think that is a 
curious combination. Every branch in any vine must abide, but what 
about asking ?
No, the figure is perfect. Go and look at a vine, 
whether here or in the East. Get close to it, and listen. You cannot 
hear anything, but if you could, you would see in every branch movement, 
a movement of life pressing along, pressing along, towards the 
grapes. Every branch is not only pressing upward, and growing offthe main stem ;
it is praying ;
every branch is dependent for sap, 
life element for maintenance to carry it out, to carry it forward, and 
press it out into fruit bearing. So Jesus said, If you abide, you can 
demand, you can ask whatever you are inclined to-a most amazing 
thing ever said about prayer is that statement. But the condition 
is that we abide. If we abide there, it is His life in us, our life is for 
evermore demanding more and more, to press it out to that fruit that 
God expects, and for which the world is waiting. 

There is no need to say a great deal about abiding. Much has been 
written about it which may confuse some people. What is it to abide ?
Abiding needs no effort. Effort is made to arrive at a point, not to 
stay there. Take a homely illustration, a congregation is abiding in 
Westminster Chapel. They are making no effort to abide ;
but 
presently the service being over, they will make an effort to 
go out of the Chapel. To abide requires no effort. It is being at 
rest. 

Abiding does not mean that we necessarily are always conscious 
of our position in the upper reaches of our consciousness. A congregation 
in Westminster Chapel is not saying during the whole hour 

A WOMAN IN TRAVAIL 

313
of the service, I am in Westminster Chapel. But they know they are 
there. Many years ago now a girl who had given herself to Christ 
came to see me one day and she said, “
I am going to give it all up, 
I cannot be a Christian.” I said to her “
Why not ? ”
She said, “
I 
made up my mind this week I would never forget Christ, and I got up 
in the morning, and thought about Him as I dressed, and I had my 
breakfast and travelled down to work, and then I got to business, and 
lunch time came, and I had never given Him a thought.” Dear child I
I gave her this illustration. I said to her, “ 
Do you know Mrs. Morgan?” 
Yes, she had seen her. “ 
Well,” I said, “ 
she is my wife.” I went on, 
“ 
I am a busy man, but I don’t go about all the time saying, I am 
Annie Morgan’s husband. There are .hours
when I never think of 
her ;
but do you think I ever forget it ?
”
” 
No,” she said, “ 
I don’t 
think you do.” We abide by obedience to the light we have, and walk 
in the way of His commandments as we know them ;
that is abiding. 

And asking, dependent, and prayer is not confined to words. It 
is the cry and passion of the life to bear fruit. Oh wonderful, wonderful 
figure, the disannulment of orphanage in union with Jesus Christ. 

“
No, never alone. No, never alone, 
He promised never to leave me,
Never to leave me alone.” 

If we are branches in the vine, that means all
the redemptive forces 
that the world needs are in Him, and as the result of His coming. 
Those resources are all at the world’s disposal through those who are 
branches in the vine. 

63. A Woman in Travail 
John
xvi :
21,
22
HIS 

IS our last study. We have considered thirty-four parablesTof Jesus, and seventy-three parabolic illustrations-one hundred 
and seven in all. How comparatively little Jesus said ;
yet in the 
course of that teaching these one hundred and seven illustrations have 
been used by Him. 

In this last converse with His own, He used four parabolic illustrations 
:
first, the parabolic action and interpretation of the washingof the disciples’ feet ; 
then the stupendous illustration of the Father’s 
house and the many abiding-places therein ;
then the allegory of the 
vine ;
and now this illustration of a woman in travail. He was now 
speaking to His own disciples in the presence of the facts that they 
were facing at the moment, and in view of the change that was to 
take place, as the result of these facts. In answer to the difficulty 

PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

raised by the disciples, He used this superlative final illustration. We 
consider then, first, the subject He intended to illustrate; then the 
figure He made use of in order to deduce from that consideration the 
teaching for ourselves. 

The subject illustrated. We must remember the background of 
the occasion. He was going, and they were sore troubled by reason 
of that fact ;
and because they knew He was going as He had told 
them by the pathway of suffering and death. But their supreme trouble 
was not so much that of the method of His going, dark as that must 
have appeared to them ;
but the fact He was going at all, that He 
was leaving them. He had been with them for three and a half years 
in very close converse, and He was going from them. Immediately 
preceding the use of this figure He had given them the allegory of the 
vine, and His statement in verse sixteen was the concluding sentence 
of that section of the allegory. “
A little while, and ye behold Me no 
more ;
and again a little while, and ye shall see Me.” That has no 
reference to the second advent. He was not referring to His second 
advent then. He was referring to the coming of the Holy Spirit, 
through Whom they would see Him as they had never seen Him before, 
and would remember all that He had told them. In the course of that 
conversation He had declared to them He would not leave them orphans, 
desolate ;
that He would come to them, when He, the Paraclete, should 
come, Whose office it should be to take of those things of the Christ, 
and reveal Him to them ;
and interpret all He had said to them, and 
make Him, the Christ, the consciousness of these men, as they had 
never known Him before. 

If anyone is looking for the experience of the Holy Ghost, theyare looking for something the Bible has never promised. The Spirit 
does not come to make us conscious He is there. He comes to make 
us conscious that Christ is there. It is the revelation of the Christ that 
the office of the Spirit is fulfilling. All this He had been teaching 
them ;
and He had said this, “
Again a little while, and ye shall see 
Me.” It is beautiful to read of the perplexity of these men. Let us 
try to put ourselves in their places. They said, “
What is this that He 
saith, A little while ? ”
h

J o n has recorded this in a good deal of detail. 
“
A little while, and ye behold Me not ;
and again a little while, and ye 
shall see Me ;
and, Because I go to the Father ?
”
What does He 
mean by the little while ?
We do not know what He means. 

Then Jesus understanding their perplexity, said to them, “
Do ye 
enquire among yourselves concerning this, that I said, A little while, 
and ye behold Me not, and again a little while, and ye shall see Me ?
”
Then He did not seem to explain it, and yet He did. “
A little while ?
”
“
Verily, verily, I say unto you, that ye shall weep and lament, but 
the world shall rejoice ;
ye shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow shall 
be turned into joy. A woman when she is in travail hath sorrow, 
because her hour is come ;
but when she is delivered of the child, 

A WOMAN IN TRAVAIL 

she remembereth no more the anguish, for the joy that a man is borninto the world. And ye therefore now have sorrow ;
but I will see youagain, and your heart shall rejoice, and your joy no one taketh awayfrom you.”

This reveals at once what our Lord was doing when He used thisremarkably arresting and final figure of speech in the course of His 
teaching. He was recognizing their sorrows. He was, moreover,
declaring that sorrows to them would be inevitable, as He was a Manof sorrows, and they were inevitable to Him. But He was intendingto reveal by that illustration the meaning of those sorrows, and theissue of them. There they were, filled with sorrow, and their sorrowwould become yet more profound, would become deeper. They wouldgo forth presently, when He was absent from sight, and especiallyafter He had come to them again, and made Himself a reality as theyhad never known Him before, they would go out by the way of sorrows.
He was speaking to them, He was speaking to His Church, He wasspeaking to us, of the nature of those sorrows. Then He used thisfigure.

Let us reverently take the figure He employed. It is the figureof motherhood, in its ultimate function. We read here, “
A woman 
when she is in travail.” That should be a definite article, not the 
indefinite, as we describe the difference between articles. “
The 
woman.” As a matter of fact He made use all through of what we callthe generic article, “
The woman.” He is using the figure of motherhood 
in the ultimate functioning thereof. He is using as a figure thetravail of a woman, when she goes down under the whelming floodsinto darkness and agony, and faces death. No profounder figure ofsorrow could be employed than that. Do not forget all
wars are 
fought out at last on the heart of womanhood, and the sorrows ofthe world are consecrated in motherhood. 

To me it is a most arresting fact demanding most reverent consideration 
that the very last time He is recorded to have used anillustration, He adopted this figure. I never read it without feelingsomehow He had in mind the Virgin Mother. He was recognizing thefact that His very existence on the earthly plane, in the marvel andeconomy of the will of God, was due to birth-pangs borne by a woman.
I think He knew, too, perfectly well that if Mary, His Mother, hadpassed through that baptism of agony and death, she had come outinto the joy and sunlight, when the Man Child was born into the world. 

. So the figure recognizes a process of sorrow and anguish, the issue ofwhich is deliverance and life and joy. Do not forget the condition ofthese men, and what lay before them, and their understanding of it.
It was the recognition of process and anguish, into the very deepabysmal depths of the shadow of death ;
but it was a process the issueof which was deliverance and life and joy. He employed this in Hislast illustration to His disciples and to His Church. 

316
PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUK LOKD 

The reference of course is a wonderful one. One cannot read it 
without the mind sweeping back over the Bible to the appalling 
mystery of evil in its genesis in human experience. We remember 
words spoken there by Jehovah to the woman. “
Unto the woman 
He said, I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy conception ;
in 
sorrow thou shalt bring forth children,” That is the first gleam of 
evangelical light that shines when sin had entered, when God had 
whispered, shall we dare to say, into the heart of motherhood the 
secret of the way of ransom and redemption through suffering, through 
sorrow ;
but out of the suffering and sorrow children, new life. 

It is interesting to see how this figure is employed in the Old Testament 
more than once. It occurs seven times in the prophecy of Isaiah 

(xxxvii. 3, xlix. 15,
20-21,
liv. I, and lxvi. 7-13). In every case it 
is a picture of deliverance and life coming through suffering and pain. 
We find in Hosea
(xiii. 13) he employed the figure in describing an 
experience through which Ephraim must pass, out of which there 
should come ransom and redemption. Micah employed it also (iv. g-10))
and in doing so he described an experience through which Zion should 
reach deliverance through suffering. 
When we come to the New Testament, we find our Lord had 
employed it already by the use of a word. In Mark xiii. 8, when He 
was foretelling earth’s convulsions, all the troubles and the sorrows 
and the convulsions of the earth, He said this, “
These things are the 
beginning of travail.” The Authorized Version reads, ”
the beginning 
of sorrows.” That is not translation, it is attempted interpretation, 
but it breaks down. He used the very word for child-birth, the beginning 
of travail. Paul, when writing to the Romans (viii. 22) said,
“
We know that the whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain 
together until now,” “
waiting for the manifestation of the sons of 
God.” Travail leading to new life ;
and so the figure, not often employed, 
is nevertheless found in Old and New Testaments. 

In the Apocalypse we find there in the figurative language of the 
twelfth chapter the picture of a woman bringing forth a man-child 
through suffering and sorrow. 

What does this all mean ? Our Lord was showing these men and 
His whole Church the inevitability of sorrows in His enterprise. I am 
not referring to personal sorrows peculiar to us ;
but to the sorrows 
of Christ Himself, reproduced and carried forward in the Church. 
Listen to Paul. “
To you it hath been granted in the behalf of Christ, 
not only to believe on Him, but also to suffer in His behalf.” Or listen 
to Paul again, in his self-same letter to the Philippians, when he 
expressed the deep passion of his own heart, “
That I may know Him, 
and the power of His resurrection, and the fellowship of His sufferings.” 
The inevitability of sorrows for Christ HimseIf
;
and it was onIy
by 
the way of His sorrows that He came to the way of His joy. “
Who 
for the joy that was set before Him endured the Cross, despising 

A WOMAN IN TRAVAIL 

shame, and hath sat down at the right hand of the throne of God.” 
He had never realized that joy had it not been by the pathway of 

&Tow.
What is true of Him is true for the Church. It is only by the 
sorrows which are the sorrows of fellowship with Him that she can 
carry out His enterprises. She must have fehowship
with the travail, 
the birth-pangs, the agony through which men and women are born, 
and new life comes into the world. 

To me one of the most fascinating pages in the Acts of the Apostles 
is found in chapters thirteen and fourteen. Paul was starting out on 
a missionary journey, and there we have the account of how he came 
to Antioch in Pisidia. A wonderful work was done there, but persecution 
arose. He had to flee, and he came to Iconium. There was 
wonderful work done until enemies came down, and he had to leave 
Iconium and he went to Lystra. Enemies followed him there again. 
It was a wonderful time at Lystra. There he probably found Timothy. 
But his enemies came there also, and nearly caught him. They cast 
him out and rained stones on him and left him for dead. I can see 
him lying there for the time being, bruised, bloody, and broken, left 
for dead. Then something happened. What was it ?
Read for yourselves. 
He was not dead !
Presently he gathered himself up, that 
broken body. What did he do ?
Did he try to get away from it all, 
and go farther afield ?
No, he turned back, and he went back to 
Lystra, the place where they had stoned him, and then on back to 
Iconium, and to Antioch in Pisidia from where he had to flee. What 
did he go back for ?
He went back to strengthen the Churches, and 
to show them that what he had been suffering was not against but 
for the Kingdom of God. He went back to show them, as Luke says, 
”
That through many tribulations we must enter into the Kingdom 
of God,” that the sorrows were the very means of bringing life. Paul 
was sharing in the birth-pangs out of which new life came. That is but 
an illustration, but these two chapters tell the whole fascinating story, 
and grip the soul as a revelation of what Jesus was here teaching Hisdisciples. 

Yes, we have our sorrows, but “
your sorrow shall be turned into 
joy.” He was not promising them compensation for suffering, that 
they would have suffering now, and must bear it. They will give you 
such joy presently, that the sorrows will be forgotten. That is not 
what He said. He said these sorrows shall be transmuted, turned into 
joy. The woman when she is in travail knows bitterness and sorrow 
and anguish ;
but afterwards she forgets the anguish and sorrow 
because of the child she holds in her arms, the life won out of death. 
So with you, said Jesus in effect, and so with My Church. 

How much do we really know of what it is to suffer in this way ? 
To revert to something which has often been pointed out. We do 
talk such insufferable nonsense about cross-bearing. Someone has 

318
PARABLES AND METAPHORS OF OUR LORD 

been ill individually, and suffering, and they say it is a great and bitterdisappointment. I do not undervalue the suffering, orunderestimat:
the disappointment. Or someone has lost everything, and they say,
We are Christians ; we must all bear the cross. That is not the cross. 
We have never touched the cross so long as our suffering is purelypersonal. We have only touched the cross when we are in fellowshipwith Christ, suffering on behalf of others, and suffering that othersthrough our sorrows and our suffering may be brought into life.

0 matchless wonder in these simpIe
and yet sublime records ofthe life and teaching of Jesus, the climax of which is one that showshow all suffering, in fellowship with Him, is of the nature of the pangsof birth, and must issue in the joy of the new life. 

